


FOWLER'S HOUSEHOLD HELPS

Over 300 Useful and Valuable Helps About the
Home, Carefully Compiled and Arranged
in Convenient Form for Frequent Use

With Complete Index







Published by
Household Publishing Company
132 Jay St., Albany, N. Y.


To the many efficient and up-to-date housekeepers of our land
this book is respectfully dedicated, in the hope that they may
find something herein to further increase their efficiency.
While the author does not guarantee the reliability of these
household helps, they have been carefully compiled from reliable
sources and are believed to be efficient if directions are
carefully followed.


Copyright, 1916
By A. L. Fowler

IMPORTANT NOTICE

This book is fully protected by copyright and any infringement
thereof will be duly prosecuted.

Extra copies may be obtained at 10c each, postpaid, from the
Household Publishing Co., 132 Jay Street, Albany, N. Y.




HOUSEHOLD HELPS

THE CARE AND USE OF GAS APPLIANCES

CARE OF GAS RANGES

In order to get satisfactory and economical service and a long
life, any range or mechanical device must be kept clean. This
applies to the gas range as well, and we therefore wish to
emphasize that the little attention required is very much worth
while.

Clean the top, the ovens and removable drip pan frequently.

Clean broiler griddle and pan _every_ time it is used.

If any burner holes become clogged, clean them out with a piece
of wire or a hairpin.

Keep the air inlets on the shutter at the front of the burners
near the levers clear of dust. The suction at this point draws
the dust, which, if allowed to accumulate, will cause the flame
to burn yellow or red instead of blue.

More ranges rust out than wear out. To keep the range free from
rust rub it very frequently with a cloth slightly oiled with any
kind of oil or grease, except kerosene or one containing salt;
we suggest the use of olive oil or one of its cheaper substitutes.
This is done to the best advantage while the range is warm.

When the burners become greasy, remove and wash them thoroughly
in soap and hot water. Never black the burners or top grates.

The broiler pan and rack should be kept out of the range when
oven is being used or it will rust, warp or chip. It requires
the same care any kitchen enamel ware does.

Always leave oven and broiler doors open for a few minutes after
lighting the oven burners and after extinguishing them. This
will dry the inside of the range and prevent rusting.

USE OF THE RANGE

With reasonable care gas is much cheaper for household cooking
than any other fuel.

Every range should be equipped with a top burner lighter which
is convenient and economical, as it is just as easy to light a
burner as to leave it burning.

Never turn on the gas until you are ready to use it.

Turn off the gas as soon as you are through with it.

Turn down the gas as low as possible to give the required heat.
Remember that water boiling rapidly is no hotter than water
boiling slowly.

Always open oven door before lighting oven burners.

Plan your cooking so as to use both broiler and oven at once.
The same burners heat both. While a roast is in the broiler,
bake the cookies, bread, apples or pudding in the oven. When the
latter are done, use the oven to cook vegetables or bake
biscuits.

To boil foods in the oven, utensils should be set directly on
the bottom of the oven.

By following this plan both the time required to cook the meal
and your fuel expense will be reduced to a minimum.

BROILING AND ROASTING

Broiling and roasting are the same form of cooking, the former
term being applied to thinner and the latter to thicker
foodstuffs. They consist of cooking at very high temperatures,
obtained only by exposure to the direct flame.

It must be done in the broiler, which should be lighted ten
minutes before cooking commences.

Always leave broiler door open and put a little cold water in
the bottom of the broiler pan to prevent the food from burning.
Place the food to be cooked on the cold rack in the broiling
pan.

STEAKS AND CHOPS

Place the meat about two inches from the fire until well seared.
Turn over and sear other side in the same way, thus preventing
the escape of the juice. Then lower the pan and turn down the
gas until the meat is done to taste. For steak allow about 10
minutes if one inch thick, 15 minutes if one and one-half inches
thick. For chops allow 8 minutes. Cooking may be done faster,
but proper tenderness of meats can only be had at the slower
rates.

FISH

Place fish on the rack, skin side down, and do not turn. Place
rack in lower part of oven. Baste liberally and turn down gas
when the fish begins to brown. Allow 20 to 30 minutes.

OTHER FOODS

Chicken, bacon, liver, ham, tripe, and vegetables, such as
tomatoes, peppers, Spanish onions, can also be broiled to
perfection in a manner similar to above.

ROAST MEATS

Roast meats should be treated the same as steaks and chops,
except that after the meat is seared the cooking should be done
more slowly, which will, of course, take more time. This part of
the cooking can be done with the broiler door closed, or can be
done in the upper or baking oven. Allow about 20 minutes to the
pound for a roast.

BAKING

Baking is cooking at moderate temperatures in a range oven. The
oven should be lighted from 5 to 10 minutes (depending upon the
food to be cooked) before the food is put in.

BREAD

Heat the oven about 5 minutes before using, and bake from 45 to
50 minutes on the lower rack. Bread should be baked in a hot
oven, should continue to rise about 15 minutes, brown for 20
minutes longer, and bake 15 minutes longer with a reduced flame.

BISCUITS

Heat oven for 10 minutes. Put biscuits in oven and bake for 5
minutes with full heat, then turn gas off completely and bake 5
minutes longer.

LOAF CAKE

Heat oven 5 minutes. Place the cake on the rack about 3 inches
from bottom of oven. Turn gas half on for about 30 minutes when
the cake should have fully risen. Increase heat enough to make
the top brown and crisp.

LAYER CAKE

Layer cake should be placed in a hotter oven than loaf cake.
Heat oven 10 minutes. Place cake on rack in center of oven and
turn out the gas for 10 minutes. Relight both burners turned
half down for 12 or 15 minutes. If not sufficiently browned
increase the heat at the last.

BOILING

Boiling is cooking in water at a temperature of 212 degrees.
This is done on the open burners on top of the range. There are
three sizes of burners: the giant, the ordinary and the
simmerer. In bringing water to boil quickly use the giant
burner, then continue boiling on the simmerer or one of the
ordinary burners turned low. Do not waste gas by boiling hard.
Use covers on kettles.

Green vegetables when boiling retain their color better if the
lid is left off the pot.

STEWING

Stewing is cooking in a small amount of water for a long time at
simmering temperature. It is the most economical way of cooking
the cheaper cuts of meat. The simmering burner should be used
for this cooking.

TOASTERS

Bread toasters placed on the top burners of a gas range supply a
quick and the most satisfactory method of preparing toast. Large
quantities of toast can be made to advantage in the broiler.

GAS WATER HEATERS

Gas water heaters supply the most economical and convenient
source of hot water obtainable.

The automatic water heaters are made to heat water instantly and
automatically upon opening any hot water faucet in the system.
These heaters are made in various capacities from 2 to 8 gallons
per minute.

Circulating tank heaters which are attached to the kitchen
boiler have to be lighted every time they are used.

Usually the heater is lighted a few minutes before hot water is
required, the time depending upon the amount likely to be used.
A 30-gallon tank may be heated in approximately one hour.
Sufficient hot water for an average bath may be had in fifteen
minutes. The most economical way to handle the circulating tank
heater, when water is needed for a bath, is as follows:

Light heater and turn on faucet so that the water will flow into
the tub as quickly as it is heated in the tank. This is usually
at the rate of one gallon per minute.

According to the city ordinance, in residences where water meter
check valves are installed on the water service, the consumer
should supply a safety water relief valve before connecting any
hot water system. This must be done to take care of the
expansion.

GAS FLAT IRONS

The gas flat iron is a most satisfactory and economical
household appliance.

FURNACE CONNECTIONS

A pipe coil should be placed in every furnace and connected to
the hot water tank in order to insure an economical supply of
hot water during the period when the furnace is in use. This
makes it possible to use the gas range in the kitchen and enjoy
its convenience and economy the year round.

ALL-GAS KITCHENS

All-gas kitchens embodying the foregoing appliances are in
general use owing to their convenience and economy.

Details regarding these kitchen appliances and other gas
appliances, such as fireplace kindlers, furnace kindlers, coke
box kindlers, garbage burners, gas steam radiators, gas water
radiators, safety garage heaters and ironing machines may be
obtained from your Gas Company. Telephone them, for their
salesmen are always glad to serve you.

DEMONSTRATOR

Most gas companies have a practical and expert demonstrator
whose services are free. When any gas appliance is not giving
perfect satisfaction in every way, or once a year on general
principles, you should ask the demonstrator to call.

GAS LIGHTING

Correct, healthful and pleasing lighting conditions do more than
anything else to brighten, modernize and make comfortable the
house of today. Poor light is poor economy in more than one
sense of the term.

"Poor light" may mean too little or too much light, a wrong kind
of light or a misplaced source of light. Any of these conditions
cause eye strain. Eye strain results in eye troubles and
inevitably affects the general health. Furthermore, the well
lighted home is an attractive center for the family, while a
badly lighted house creates gloom and a restless atmosphere.

Gas light offers convenience in lighting and beauty in its
fixtures.

Gas light presents the real economy of the best at the least
cost.

All new houses should be piped for gas. Even an old house can be
equipped with ceiling, wall and baseboard outlets with but
little expense or inconvenience to you. Your Gas Company will
also help you to select just the fixtures and burners you need
to harmonize with the decorations in your home and to supply the
best possible light for each room.

At your call, the Company will keep your equipment in thoroughly
efficient condition. You should use only the best gas mantles.
It sells them at cost to you in order to encourage their
use--cheap mantles are cheap in first cost and expensive in the
long run.

Your Gas Company prides itself on being "at your service."

ELECTRICAL APPLIANCES

ELECTRIC SERVICE IN THE HOME

The home that is completely wired has at hand a tireless
electric servant-of-all-work; for the past few years have seen
the invention and perfection of devices for doing household
labor of practically every description. These are of practical
economy not only when used by the housewife, but also in making
domestic help more efficient and better satisfied.

In addition to the almost universal use of electricity for
lighting, with every facility for flexibility and convenience in
connecting and control, electricity may be absolutely depended
upon today for washing, wringing, drying and ironing the
clothes, for sweeping and dusting, for polishing, for cleaning
silver and brightwork, for all cooking, for such culinary
processes as beating eggs, mixing bread, grinding meat or
coffee, turning the ice cream freezer or sharpening knives, or,
on emergency, for heating or cooling the house. And (contrary to
popular belief), in most of these cases electricity offers an
opportunity for actual domestic economy.

Electricity is no longer a rich man's luxury, for its
convenience, cleanliness, time saving and economy, as shown by
the following pages, have made it every man's necessity.

ALL-ELECTRIC HOMES

The model home is electrically lighted, has the kitchen equipped
with an electric range, electric dishwasher, electric kitchen
set for beating eggs, grinding, mixing and polishing; the
dining-room equipped with electric coffee percolator, electric
samovar and an electric toaster; laundry equipped with electric
washing machine, motor-driven mangle heated by gas or electricity,
and an electric iron. A vacuum cleaner is essential in every
household. Other appliances which will prove their value if once
tried are heating pads, vibrators, heating or disk stoves,
luminous radiators, sewing machines, fans, pressing iron for the
sewing-room and Christmas tree outfits.

ELECTRIC RANGE

Cooking by electricity is an ideal method, and the electric
range makes it practical. Every housewife should be familiar
with its advantages as it provides the most satisfactory
results.

The electric range is reliable, efficient and durable. It saves
time, work, worry and watching. It promotes safety, comfort and
cleanliness.

The electric range is convenient and easy to operate, as the
heat is always instantly available and readily regulated at the
turn of a switch. Cooking becomes a certainty, as the same
switch position always provides the same amount of heat. All the
heat is concentrated on the cooking and there is no excess heat
wasted on other parts of the range or radiated out into the
room. Ordinary cooking utensils are used as with other ranges.

Cooking with an electric range can be done at a reasonable cost
in consideration of the many inherent advantages above referred
to.

The roasting of meat to the exact degree desired need not be the
dread of the cook when an electric oven is available. The
uniformity and reliability of the heat of the electric oven
facilitates the roasting of meat without constant attention and
worry.

Electric broiling insures tender chops and steaks, as the
surface of the meat is quickly seared and all its juicy
tenderness is retained.

In order to facilitate the use of the electric range, your
Lighting Company gives an instruction book with every installation.

ELECTRIC DISHWASHER

After each meal scrape off the dishes and place them in the
washer in such a position that the water can be thrown against
both sides of them. It is convenient to accumulate enough
dishes to fill the washer, as it may thereby become possible to
do all of the day's dishes in one washing.

Shake washing powder or liquid soap into the machine and add
one-quarter of a cup of ammonia. Pour in the right amount of hot
water from faucet (according to instructions with machine) and
allow the machine to run about 10 minutes. Then let the water
run out and pour in a little more to wash out the sediment.
Close the drain and pour in boiling water which acts as a
rinsing water. Run the machine two minutes more and drain. Raise
cover immediately after the machine is stopped to let the steam
out. The dishes will dry by themselves with high polish, but it
is necessary to wipe the silver and glassware.

The washer is then ready to be used as a storage for dishes
until needed again.

VACUUM CLEANER

There are many good electric vacuum cleaners on the market, all
of which operate on the same general principle of suction. The
Hoover, however, has a motor-driven brush in addition, which
acts as a sweeper.

Oil the motor with a drop or two each time it is used, according
to the directions given with the machine. If using a Hoover, the
brush bearings should not be oiled as they are made of wood.

Should the brush become stuck it is due to threads, string and
hair which have been collected by it. Remove the brush according
to directions supplied with the machine and free all the
bearings.

Clean the bag after using by carefully removing it from the
machine and shaking the dirt on a newspaper.

Once a month the machine should be cleaned by taking off the
bag, lifting the machine from the carpet and allowing the
machine to run for a couple of minutes.

SEWING MACHINE

Follow directions supplied with the machine as to oiling and
proper size of needle, thread, etc. Do not make any adjustments
unless you are sure you know how. These adjustments require
patience, as the adjusting screws must be turned a very little
at a time to note the effect produced. Do not run the machine at
too high a speed as this will shorten its life.

When putting a motor on a foot-power machine be sure that the
old machine is not over-speeded.

If your machine is provided with a foot release be sure that the
release entirely cuts off current, otherwise the motor will run
very hot.

FLAT IRON

There are several makes of electric irons which do excellent
work and have a long life. The standard sizes are 3, 6 and 8
pounds. The 6-pound iron is best adapted for general household
use.

If the iron becomes too hot, disconnect the lead from the iron.
In case the terminals become corroded, rub them with a piece of
fine emery cloth to remove corrosion. If the contacts become
corroded or bent they should be replaced.

Your Lighting Company maintains a repair department for all
heating and cooking appliances. Telephone Sales Department.

ELECTRIC LAMPS

Mazda lamps are the most efficient lamps obtainable and their
use is recommended for all classes of service. Your electric
bills depend upon the watts per lamp and the number of hours of
use. Note in the following table that the Mazda lamps give on
the average two and one-half times as much light for the same
cost as the Gem carbon lamps. The column "Cost of current per
month" gives the cost of burning one lamp one hour per day for
one month at the maximum rate of nine cents per K. W. H.


                      Table of Comparisons
    _Gem_Carbon_Lamps_                  _Mazda Lamps_(Type_B_)
                  Cost of                             Cost of
                  current per                         current per
 Watts    C.P.    month in cents    Watts    C.P.     month in cents
    30     12           8.1            10      8            2.7
    50     20          13.5            25     23            6.7
    80     32          21.6            40     38           10.8
                                       60     60           16.2
                                      100    105           27.0


RESIDENTIAL LIGHTING

In most cases the following recommendations of Mazda lamp sizes
will be found most satisfactory in the home. Frosted lamps are
recommended wherever the direct rays of the lamp may strike the
eye, as the frosting diffuses the light.

Parlor

1-Bracket chandelier    1--60 watt

2-Bracket chandelier    2--40 watt

3-Bracket chandelier    3--25 watt

Side wall fixtures for decorative purposes--10 watt, all
frosted.

Side wall fixtures for good general illumination--25 or 40 watt,
all frosted.

Hall

Small hall    1--10 watt

Large hall    1--25 watt

Porch

Ceiling light    1--10 watt

Side bracket     1--25 watt

If used for reading light    1--60 watt

Bedroom

Ceiling light    1--40 watt

Side bracket     1--40 watt
            _or_ 2--25 watt

Sitting-room

Same as parlor. A well shaded reading lamp with a 40 or 60 watt
all-frosted bulb.

Dining-room

Dome    1--60 watt bowl frosted

2 or 3 light shower    25 watt bowl frosted

Semi-indirect    1--60 or 100 watt clear

Bathroom

Ceiling or side brackets    25 watt

Kitchen

Ceiling light    1--40 or 60 watt bowl frosted

Side bracket over sink    1--25 watt bowl frosted

Attic

25 watt

Cellar

In installing lamps for the cellar the time they are lighted
should be borne in mind. As this is short, the expense of
running larger lamps--25 watt and 40 watt--is insignificant. The
following locations should be provided for:

Bottom of cellar stairs    25 watt

Work bench    40 watt

Laundry    40 watt

Vegetable and fruit cellar    25 watt

Lamp in front of furnace    60 watt

This latter lamp is usually close enough to also illuminate the
coal bin.

Care of Lamps and Fixtures

Lamps and fixtures should he cleaned once a month to insure the
maximum efficiency. Reliable tests have shown that dirty
glassware reduces effective illumination from 10 to 50 per cent.

FIXTURE RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE HOUSE

Parlor

Ceiling fixtures               Indirect or semi-indirect

Side fixtures                              Semi-indirect

Baseboard receptacles for table or floor lamps.

Hall

One ceiling fixture equipped with two lamps wired so that one or
both lamps may be operated as desired. This arrangement provides
for a night light.

Sitting-room and Library

Same as parlor.

Bedroom

One ceiling semi-indirect fixture.

Side brackets near dressing table, or,

Rigid pendant for use over center of dressing table.

Baseboard outlet near bed for heating pad or reading lamp.

Dining-room

Indirect or semi-indirect fixture.

Baseboard or floor outlet for toaster and percolator.

Floor call button attached to kitchen buzzer.

Bathroom

One side bracket on each side of mirror.

One side wall receptacle for curling iron, shaving mug and
luminous radiator.

Kitchen

One center ceiling light, one side bracket over sink and one
side wall outlet for iron and washing machine.

Cellar

Five outlets should be provided for proper illumination, one at
foot of stairs, one at work bench, one in fruit and vegetable
cellar and one in front of furnace located so as also to
illuminate the coal bin.

A control switch and telltale lamp should be provided in the
kitchen.

Attic

Two outlets are usually sufficient. A control switch and
telltale lamp should be provided in the hall.

Clothes Press

A rigid pendant with a chain-pull socket should be provided for
each dark clothes press.

It is most convenient and practical to have these lights
operated by an automatic switch which is opened and closed by
the closing and opening of the closet door. This provides a
light immediately the door is opened, while when the door is
shut one may be sure that the light has not been left burning.

GENERAL

Baseboard outlets should be installed in all rooms for the use
of vacuum cleaner, fans, or other portable appliances.

Bell-ringing transformers which provide current for door bells
and buzzers should be installed for each apartment.

Emergency gas lights should be provided for the halls, kitchen,
dining-room and bathroom.

If any special requirements are not provided for in the above
recommendations your Lighting Company will be glad to give you
expert advice free of charge. They pride themselves on being at
your service.

WIRING HINTS

The service entrance should be of sufficient capacity to care
for additional load in the form of electric heating, cooking and
other domestic appliances. The branch circuits should be heavy
and numerous enough to care for additional outlets for lighting
and appliances as found desirable. Your Lighting Company will be
glad to go over your plans with you.

The electric meters should be located in the cellar near the gas
meter, as this will save you the annoyance of meter readers and
testers going through the house to the attic.

Be sure and install control switches and telltale lamps on
cellar and attic lights.

Provide three-way switches in the halls so that the hall lights
may be controlled from either the first or second floor.

All ceiling outlet lighting, and wherever desirable, side
bracket lighting, should be controlled by wall switches. These
switches should preferably be of the push-button type rather
than of the snap-switch type. In general the best location for
these switches is on the wall of the room right next to the door
which is the entrance most frequently used.

FUSES

Fuses on your electrical wiring act in the same capacity as a
safety valve on a steam boiler. Whenever there is an overload on
the circuit or a short circuit these fuses blow and relieve the
strain on your wiring.

When in doubt or when in need of suggestions, 'phone the Sales
Department of your Lighting Company.

HOUSEHOLD HELPS

Look in the Index for the principal word of the article about
which you desire information. For instance, "To Open Fruit
Jars", look under "Fruit Jars"

IN THE KITCHEN

Use Sand Soap to Sharpen the Food Chopper--If the knives of
your food chopper become black and dull, run a piece of sand
soap, or scouring brick, through the chopper as you would a
potato. It will brighten and sharpen the knives and they will
cut like new. Use pulverized sand soap or the scouring brick
with which you scour.

Kerosene for Water Bugs--A small quantity of kerosene poured
down the drain pipe occasionally will stop annoyance from this
pest.

To Prevent a Glass from Breaking when pouring hot water in it,
first put a spoon in the glass. This method can also be used
when pouring hot soup or any hot liquid in any fragile receptacle.

When Butter is Too Hard to spread easily, turn a heated bowl
upside down over the butter dish for a few minutes. This will
thoroughly soften the butter without melting it.

To Open Fruit Jars--Strips of emery board, about one inch wide
and eight inches or so long, will be found useful to loosen
obstinate fruit jar tops. Just place the strip around the edge
of the top, and give it a twist.

To Keep Refrigerator Sweet--A lump of charcoal should be
placed in the refrigerator to keep it sweet. When putting your
best tea or coffee urn away, drop a small piece of charcoal in
it and prop the lid open with a toothpick.

Currycomb for Scaling Fish--A currycomb is better than a knife
for scaling fish, as it protects the hands.

Cornpopper for Toasting Bread--The cornpopper can be used for
toasting odds and ends of stale bread which would otherwise be
wasted.

To Prevent Stains Under the Nails--Dip the ends of the fingers
in melted tallow before beginning a task which is likely to
stain them.

To Remove Stains from the Hands, rub them with a piece of lemon.

Starch to Prevent Chapped Hands--Use starch which is ground
fine to prevent chapped hands. Every time the hands are washed
and rinsed thoroughly, wipe them off, and, while they are yet
damp, rub a pinch of starch over their entire surface. Chapping
is then not likely to occur.

Wisp Brush for Greasy Pans and Kettles--A small wisp brush is
better for cleaning greasy pans and kettles than the string mop
you use for the dishes. You can buy them two for five cents. A
little soap powder sprinkled on them makes a fine suds for the
tinware and cooking utensils.

Best Way to Strain Soup--When straining soup set a coarse
strainer inside of a fine one and pour the liquid through both;
you will thus avoid clogging the fine one with pieces of meat
and broken bones.

How to Crack Pecan Nuts--Almost all housewives know how very
hard it is to crack pecan nuts and get the meats out whole. Pour
boiling water over the nuts and let them stand tightly covered
for five or six hours. The nut meats may then be extracted
easily without a trace of the bitter lining of the nut. Use a
nut cracker and crack lightly all around the nuts. The work is
quickly done and is not at all like the tedious process of
picking out the meats from the dry nuts. The meats nearly always
come out whole.

Lemon Squeezer for Making Beef Juice--When one has to make
beef juice in small quantities which does not warrant buying an
expensive meat-press, use instead a ten-cent lemon squeezer.
This can be sterilized by boiling and kept absolutely clean. One
can press out several ounces in a very few minutes.

Quick Way to Peel Carrots--Use a coarse grater to peel
carrots. A few passes over the grater will rid the carrots of
their skins quicker than any other method.

Proper Way to Slice Bacon--To slice bacon properly, always
place it rind down, and do not attempt to cut through the rind
until you have the desired number of slices. Then slip the knife
under them and cut them free of the rind, keeping as close to it
as possible.

When Cream is on the Turn--When the sweetness of the cream is
doubtful and there is no more on hand and it must be used, a
pinch of soda will keep it from curdling, even in hot coffee.

To Prevent Musty Teapot--When putting away a silver teapot, or
one that is not in everyday use, place a little stick across the
top underneath the cover. This will allow fresh air to get in
and prevent mustiness.

Lemon or Orange Peel for Tea Caddy--Thoroughly dry the peel
from an orange or a lemon, and place it in the tea caddy. This
will greatly improve the flavor of the tea.

Heat Lemons Before Squeezing--In using lemons, heat them
thoroughly before squeezing and you will obtain nearly double
the quantity of juice that you would if they had not been
heated.

To Keep Teakettle from Rusting--A clean oyster shell placed in
the teakettle will keep out rust.

To Clean Gas Stove Burners--Pick the holes open with a large
pin and apply a vacuum cleaner to take out the particles of
dirt.

Flour for Burning Kerosene--Wheaten flour is the best
extinguisher to throw over a fire caused by the spilling and
ignition of kerosene. This should be a matter of common
knowledge, since flour is always within convenient reach.

Use for Old Newspapers--Old newspapers clean stoves
beautifully, as well as being useful for polishing kitchen
windows.

To Take Rust from Flat-Irons, tie some yellow beeswax or
paraffine in a cloth, and when the iron is warm, but not hot
enough to use, rub with the wax and then rub it through sand or
salt.

A Good Stove Polisher--A piece of burlap is a very good
polisher for the kitchen stove or range when it is hot. It does
not burn readily, and for that reason is better than flannel or
cotton cloth or paper.

Wire Rack for Use Under Pies--When taking pies from the oven,
do not put them on the flat surface of the table to cool unless
a high wire rack is put under them. The rack helps to keep the
crust crisp and they will not be soggy.

Marble Slab or Plate Glass for Mixing Board--For mixing cake
and pastry an old marble slab or a piece of plate glass is
better than a wooden board.

To Prevent Cakes from Burning--Sprinkle the bottom of the oven
with fine, dry salt to prevent cakes, pies, and other pastry
from burning on the bottom.

Wooden Bowl When Washing Silver--When washing silver, use a
wooden tub or bowl if possible. There will be less danger of the
silver getting scratched or otherwise damaged.

Tissue Paper for Greasy Dishes--Very greasy dishes should be
wiped with soft tissue paper before being washed.

To Skin Tomatoes Easily--Tomatoes nearly always have to be
skinned before being used. To do this easily, place them in a
basin and pour boiling water over them. Let stand a minute, and
then drain.

Another method is to rub the tomatoes all over with the back of
a knife to loosen the skins before peeling. This is said to be
better than scalding.

To Peel Sweet Potatoes Easily--Before putting sweet potatoes
in the oven, grease the skins and they can then be peeled easily
and without any waste of the potato.

To Prevent Roasted Meat from Drying Out--To prevent roasted
meat, which is to be served cold, from drying out and losing its
flavor, wrap it in cheesecloth while it is still hot.

When Food is Too Salty--When you have put too much salt into
cooking food, stretch a clean cloth tightly over the kettle and
sprinkle a table-spoonful of flour over the cloth. Then allow
the contents of the kettle to steam and in a few moments the
flour will absorb the surplus salt.

To Remove Fish Odor from Hands--A few drops of ammonia in the
water in which you wash your hands will remove all fishy odor
from the hands after preparing fish for cooking.

To Remove Onion Smell from Pans--The disagreeable smell of
onions which clings to pots and pans so stubbornly can be
quickly removed by washing and drying the pans, then scouring
them with common salt, and placing them on the stove until the
salt is brown. Shake often, then wash the pans as usual.

To Prevent Onions from Making the Eyes Water--Scalding water
poured over onions will keep the eyes from watering.

Hint When Baking Bread--When baking bread or rolls, put a
saucepan full of boiling water into the oven. The steam rising
from it will keep the crust smooth and tender.

To Make Meat Tender--A tablespoonful of vinegar added to tough
meat while it is boiling or roasting will make it more tender.

To Keep the Lid on a Boiling Pot--A teaspoonful of butter
dropped into the water in which you are boiling dry beans, or
other starchy vegetables, will stop the annoyance of having the
lid of the pot jump off, as it will otherwise do. The butter
acts the same as oil on troubled waters and keeps it calm and
manageable.

To Take Fish Taste from Forks and Spoons--To remove the taste
and smell of fish from forks and spoons, rub them with a small
piece of butter before washing. All taste and smell will thus be
entirely removed.

How to Judge Mushrooms--Sprinkle a little salt on the gills of
mushrooms to judge their fitness to eat. If the gills turn black
the mushrooms are fit for food; if they turn yellow, the
mushrooms are poisonous.

Orange Peel for Cake Flavoring--Do not throw away orange peel,
but dry in the oven. Grate the yellow part and use for flavoring
cakes. It will give a delicious orange taste.

How to Prevent Fish from Breaking Up When Frying--When frying
fish, if the pieces are put in the hot fat with the skin side
uppermost, and allowed to brown well before turning, there will
be no possibility of the fish breaking up.

To Remove Cake from Tin--When taking a cake from the oven,
place the cake tin on a damp cloth for a moment and the cake
will turn out of the tin quite easily.

Lemon Juice for Boiling Rice--A few drops of lemon juice added
to boiling rice will help to keep the grains separate and will
make them white.

Onion for Boston Baked Beans--Bake a small onion with your
Boston baked beans to prevent indigestion and add to their fine
flavor.

Hint for Baking Gems--When filling gem pans with batter leave
one pan without batter and fill with water. This will prevent
the gems from burning on top.

Sandpaper for Cleaning Pots--Always keep a piece of fine
sandpaper by the sink with which to clean pots.

To Prevent Cake from Sticking to Tins after baking, first grease
the tins and then dust them with flour. Lightly beat out the
loose flour, leaving only that which sticks to the grease. This
does away with the old-fashioned method of lining the pans with
greased paper.

To Peel Apples Easily--Pour boiling water over the cooking
apples and they will be much easier to peel. This will be found
a considerable saving of time when busy.

When Bread is Too Brown--When bread is baked in too hot an
oven and the outside crust gets too brown, do not attempt to cut
it off, but as soon as the bread gets cold rub it over with a
coarse tin grater and remove all the dark-brown crust.

Mustard for Removing Odors from the Hands--Ground mustard is
excellent for cleaning the hands after handling onions and other
things with disagreeable odors.

Economy in Use of Candles--A candle which has burned too low
to remain in the candlestick can be used to the very end if
removed from the stick and placed on a penny or other small,
flat piece of metal.

To Get Rid of Spiders--A good way to rid the house of spiders
is to take pieces of cotton wool, saturate them with oil of
pennyroyal and place them in their haunts.

To Rid the Kitchen of Flies--Take a cup of vinegar and place
it on the stove where it will simmer enough to make an odor.

To Clear Beetles Out of Cupboards and larders, sprinkle a little
benzine over the boards. This method will kill the eggs as well
as the insects.

To Drive Cockroaches Away--Powdered gum camphor will drive
cockroaches away if sprinkled about their haunts.

To Remove Egg Stains from Silver--Egg stains can be removed
from silver by rubbing it with table salt on a wet rag.

To Polish Faucets--Nothing is better for scouring a faucet
than the half of a lemon after the juice has been squeezed out.
After scouring, wash it and it will shine like new. An orange
peel will also give good results.

For Scorched Vegetables or Other Food--When vegetables or
other foods become scorched, remove the kettle at once from
the stove and put it into a pan of cold water. In a quarter of
an hour the suggestion of scorch will be nearly if not entirely
gone.

When Cake is Scorched--If a cake is scorched on the top or
bottom, grate over it lightly with a nutmeg-grater instead of
scraping it with a knife. This leaves a smooth surface for
frosting.

To Make Muffins and Gems Lighter--Muffins and gems will be
lighter if, after greasing your pans you place them in the oven
a few moments and let them get hot before putting in the batter.

To Make Pie Crust Flaky--To make pie crust flaky, try adding
half a spoonful of vinegar to the cold water when mixing.

To Make Apple Pie Tender--If you are in doubt whether the
apples in your open-top pies are cooking tender, just invert
another pie pan over the pie and the steam will serve to cook
the apples thoroughly.

To Make Fowl Tender--After a turkey or chicken is cleaned, the
inside and outside should be rubbed thoroughly with a lemon
before the dressing is put in. It will make the meat white,
juicy and tender.

To Prevent Meat from Scorching--When roasting meat, and there
is danger that it will become too brown, place a dish of water
in the oven. The steam arising from it will prevent scorching
and the meat will cook better. A piece of greased paper placed
over the meat is also considered good.

To Keep Eggs from Popping When Cooking--Mix a tablespoonful of
flour in the hot grease in which eggs are to be cooked, and
break the eggs into this. You will also find that the flour
gives the eggs a better flavor.

To Remove Egg Shells When Cooking--If a piece of shell gets
into the egg when breaking eggs into a bowl, just touch it with
a half shell and it can easily be removed.

To Keep Yolks of Eggs Fresh--Yolks of eggs which are not
wanted for immediate use can be kept good for several days by
dropping them into cold water and keeping in a cool place--the
cooler the better.

To Prevent Boiling Eggs from Cracking--The four following
suggestions are given in regard to boiling eggs. Use the one
best suited to the purpose:

When Boiling Eggs, wet the shells thoroughly in cold water and
they will not crack.

To Prevent Eggs from Bursting While Boiling, prick one end of
each of the eggs with a needle before placing them in the water.
This makes an outlet for the air and keeps the shells from
cracking.

If Eggs Which You Are About to Boil Are Cracked, add a little
vinegar to the water and they can then be boiled as satisfactorily
as undamaged ones.

A Spoonful of Salt should be added to the water in which
slightly cracked eggs are boiled. The salt will prevent the
white of the egg from coming out.

Worn-Out Broom for Floor Polisher--When a long-handled broom
becomes worn out, instead of throwing it away, tie a piece of
felt or flannel cloth around the head and make a good floor
polisher. It will make work much easier and also keep linoleum
in good condition. Footmarks can be rubbed off at any time
without stooping.

To Clean a Slender Flower Vase fasten a piece of an old sponge
onto a stick and push it down into the vase; this will also be
found useful for cleaning decanters and water bottles.

To Keep Bread Fresh--Wash a potato, wipe it dry and put it in
your breadpan. It will keep the bread fresh for several days.

To Freshen Old Lemons--Lemons that have become old and dry can
be made fresh and juicy again by putting them in a pan of hot
water and keeping the water at an even temperature for about two
hours.

A More Effective Dishcloth for Cleaning--In knitting
dishcloths it is a good plan to put in several rows of
hard-twisted cord. This hard part of the cloth will clean many
surfaces on which it is not advisable to use scouring soap or
metal.

To Clean Linoleum, use skimmed milk instead of water. It will
keep it glossy, and will not rot it as water does.

A Good Remedy for Burns--Cover a soft cloth with a thick layer
of scraped raw potato (Irish) and apply it to the burned part.
The potato should be renewed as often as necessary to keep it
moist.

For Burns and Light Scalds--At once coat the burned or scalded
spot with mucilage and the smarting will cease almost instantly.
If the burn is quite deep, keep it covered with a paste made of
cold water and flour; do not allow the paste to get dry until
the smarting stops.

A GOOD WAY TO SAVE GAS--

READ THE PAGES IN THE
FRONT OF THIS BOOK

Brush for Removing Silk from Corn--When preparing corn on the
ear for the table, or for canning purposes, use a small hand
brush to remove the silk. It will do the job more thoroughly and
quicker than it can be done with the fingers.

To Remove Grease Spots from the Kitchen Floor--Apply alcohol
to the spots and you will be surprised to find how easily they
can be removed. The small amount of alcohol necessary to be used
need not soil the hands.

To Open a Jar of Fruit or Vegetables Which Has Stuck Fast--
Place the jar in a deep saucepan half full of cold water; bring
it to a boil and let it boil for a few moments. The jar can then
be opened easily.

To Identify Dishes Which Have Been Loaned--When taking dishes
or silver to a picnic or other public gathering, place a small
piece of surgeon's plaster on the bottom of each dish and on the
under side of the handles of spoons and forks. On this plaster
mark your initials (in indelible ink if possible). The plaster
will not come off during ordinary washing, but can later be
removed by putting it in a warm place until the adhesive gum
melts.

Tablet or Slate for Kitchen Memoranda--Keep in the kitchen a
tablet with a pencil tied to it, or a ten-cent slate and pencil
hung upon the wall. The day's work is easier and smoother if you
plan each morning the special tasks of the day and jot them
down, checking them off as accomplished. Planning the day's
meals in advance results in better balanced menus. Writing down
all groceries and household supplies as needed will save time
when you go to the store or the order boy calls.

To Fasten Food Chopper Securely--Before fastening the food
chopper to the table, put a piece of sandpaper, large enough to
go under both clamps, rough side up, on the table; then screw
the chopper clamps up tight and you will not be bothered with
them working loose.

To Remove Insects from Vegetables which are being washed, put a
pinch of borax in the water. It will bring any live insect to
the surface at once.

To Clean Rust and Stains from Tin--Tins that have become rusty
or stained may be cleaned by rubbing well with the cut surface
of a raw potato which has been dipped in a fine cleaning powder.

To Polish Glass--After washing glass, polish with dry salt.

Lemon Juice for Cut Glass--Lemon juice is fine for polishing
cut-glass tumblers. These pretties are so delicate there is
always danger of breaking the stems. Fill a pan half full of
cold water, place a cloth in the bottom and then add the juice
of an entire lemon. Just dipping a tumbler about in this
cleans and polishes it and it only needs drying with soft linen.

Many Uses of Ammonia--As a time saver it is unequalled when
washing woodwork and windows. It is fine for cleaning carpets on
the floor. They should be swept well and the broom washed; then
brush again with water. They will look much brighter, and if
there is a lurking moth in the carpet this treatment will
destroy it. Ammonia will set color, remove stains and grease,
and soften fabrics.

A light soap suds with a few drops of ammonia added will give a
sparkle to ordinary pressed glass and china impossible to secure
without it.

Hints for Oil Lamps and Chimneys--The five following
paragraphs contain some good suggestions for the use of oil
lamps:

Put a Small Lump of Camphor Gum in the body of an oil lamp and
it will greatly improve the light and make the flame clearer and
brighter. A few drops of vinegar occasionally is said to give
the same results.

To Prevent Lamp Chimney from Cracking--A common hairpin placed
astride the top edge of a lamp chimney will keep it from
cracking from the heat, and will greatly prolong its life.

Gas and Lamp Chimneys, earthenware and baking dishes can be
toughened before using by putting them into cold water which is
heated gradually until it boils and then cooled slowly.

When Washing Your Lamp Chimneys, lift them out of the water and
set them on the hot stove; they will not break. Let them steam;
then wipe on a clean cloth and they will be as clear as crystal.

Take Your Lamp Wicks When New and soak them thoroughly in good
apple vinegar and you will be delighted with the result. Do not
wring them out, but hang them near a stove or lay out on a plate
until dry. This treatment will double the lighting power of your
lamps or lanterns. With wicks prepared in this way, only one
cleaning each week is necessary, as the wicks will not smoke and
the chimney and globe will not blacken around the top.

To Mend Broken China, Etc.--The four following methods of
mending china, etc., are all considered good:

To Mend Broken China--Mix well a teaspoonful of alum and a
tablespoonful of water and place it in a hot oven until quite
transparent. Wash the broken pieces in hot water, dry them, and
while still warm coat the broken edges thickly; then press
together very quickly, for it sticks instantly.

To Mend Broken Crockery--White lead is one of the few cements
that will resist both heat and water. Apply it thinly to the
edges of the broken pieces, press them tightly together and set
aside to dry.

A Cheap Cement for Broken China is lime mixed with the white of
an egg. Take only sufficient white of an egg to mend one article
at a time, and mix thoroughly with a small quantity of lime.

To Mend China successfully melt a small quantity of pulverized
alum in an old spoon over the fire. Before it hardens rub the
alum over the pieces to be united, press them together and set
aside to dry. After drying they will not come apart, even when
washed with hot water.

Embroidery Hoops and Cheesecloth for Cooling Dishes--When
putting puddings or other dishes out of doors to cool, use a
cover made of embroidery hoops of proper size with cheesecloth
put in as a piece of embroidery is. The contents will be safe
from dust and at the same time the air can circulate freely. The
hoops will keep the cloth from getting into the contents and
also weigh just enough to keep it from blowing off.

To Clean Mica in Stove Doors--To clean the mica in stove
doors, rub it with a soft cloth dipped in equal parts of vinegar
and cold water.

To Clean Tarnished Silver, use a piece of raw potato dipped in
baking soda.

For Tarnished Silverware--If the silverware has become badly
tarnished, put it in an aluminum dish, cover it with water, and
boil it up for a short time. It will come out bright and clean.

To Clean White Knife Handles--To clean and whiten
ivory-handled knives which have become yellow with age, rub with
fine emery paper or sandpaper.

To Prevent Rust in Tinware--If new tinware is rubbed over with
fresh lard and thoroughly heated in the oven before being used,
it will never rust afterward, no matter how much it is put in
water.

To Remove Rust from Tinware--To remove rust from tinware, rub
the rusted part well with a green tomato cut in half. Let this
remain on the tin for a few minutes; then wash the article and
the rust will have vanished.

Kerosene for Tinware Stains, Etc.--Kerosene removes stains
from tinware, porcelain tubs and varnished furniture. Rub with a
woolen cloth saturated with it; the odor quickly evaporates.

To Preserve Enamel Pans--If new enamel pans are placed in a
pan of water and allowed to come to a boil and then cooled, they
will be found to last much longer without burning or cracking.

To Prevent Dust When Sweeping--Wet the broom before starting
to sweep; it makes it more pliable and less hard on the carpet's
pile and also prevents dust from arising.

To Clean Paint or Rust from Linoleum--When linoleum becomes
spotted with paint or rust it may be cleaned by rubbing with
steel shavings or emery paper.

Linseed Oil for Kitchen Floor--Boiled linseed oil applied to
the kitchen floor will give a finish that is easily cleaned. It
may also be painted over the draining board of the sink; this
will do away with hard scrubbing. It should be renewed twice a
year.

Window Cleaning Hints--The six following paragraphs will be
found useful when cleaning windows:

After Polishing Windows, moisten a clean rag with a very little
glycerine and rub it over the pane. Windows polished in this way
do not "steam" and will stay clean much longer.

A Cold-Weather Cleaner for Windows--Dampen a cheesecloth with
kerosene and you can clean your windows quickly in cold weather
when water can not be applied to the glass without freezing.

Window Cleaning Help--Before starting to clean windows
carefully brush all dust off the frames. Add a few drops of
kerosene to the water used for cleaning and it will give the
glass a much brighter and more crystal-like appearance.

To Clean Windows--First wash the glass with water to which a
little ammonia has been added and then polish with a chamois
which has been dipped in water and wrung as dry as possible.

Cloths for Cleaning Windows Without Use of Water can be made
with a semi-liquid paste of benzine and calcined magnesia. The
cloth, which should be coarse linen or something free from lint,
is dipped into this mixture and hung in the air until the
spirits have evaporated and it is free from odor. This cloth may
be used again and again and is a great convenience. When soiled,
wash it and redip.

To Remove Paint from Window Panes--Paint can be removed from
window panes by applying a strong solution of soda.

To Clean a Glass Bottle, cut a lemon in small pieces and drop
them into the bottle; half fill with water, and shake well.

Old Stocking Tops for Dusters or Dustless Mop--Old stocking
tops make good dusters when sewed together. They also make good
polishing cloths for oiling and rubbing down floors and
furniture.

Several old stocking tops cut into strips and dipped in
paraffine oil make a fine dustless mop for hardwood floors.

Cheap Stain for Wood Floors--Ten cents' worth of permanganate
of potash will stain a wood floor. When dry polish it with some
beeswax and turpentine. It will look as though it had been that
color for years. Put the permanganate of potash in an old tin
and pour about one quart of boiling water over it; then, with a
brush, paint over the floor, after it has cooled. When thoroughly
dry, polish. The floor will look like oak.

Cheap Polish for Varnished Floors or Linoleum--Take equal
parts of kerosene, linseed oil and turpentine to make an
inexpensive polish for oiled or varnished floors. An application
of this polish to the kitchen linoleum with soft cloth or mop
will keep it like new.

Varnish for Linoleum--To make linoleum last much longer and
have a better appearance, give it a good coat of varnish every
few months.

To Make Wallpaper Waterproof--To varnish the paper back of the
sink, or other places, so it may be wiped with a damp cloth,
coat with a mixture made with one ounce of gum arabic, three
ounces of glue, and a bar of soap, dissolved in a quart of
water. This amount will coat quite a wide surface.

IN THE SEWING ROOM

When Hands Perspire and soil the sewing material, try bathing
them with strong alum water.

To Prevent Oil from Soiling Goods--To prevent a sewing machine
that has been oiled from soiling the material, try the following
method: Tie a small piece of ribbon, or cotton string, around
the needlebar near the point where it grips the needle.

When Scissors Get Blunt, sharpen them by opening and drawing
backward and forward on a piece of glass. This will sharpen the
bluntest of scissors.

To Tighten a Loose Sewing-Machine Belt, put a few drops of
castor-oil on it; run the machine a few minutes and the belt
will tighten.

To Remove Sewing-Machine Oil Spots:

(a) Wet the spots with spirits of turpentine and wash out with
cold water and toilet soap, or,

(b) Rub the spot with chalk as soon as noticed. Leave for a
short time, then brush, and the spot will disappear.

To Pair Stockings--For stockings with white heels or tops,
mark with indelible ink. For all-black stockings, use colored
threads, making a cross-stitch on one pair, two cross-stitches
on another, etc.

To Prevent Cutting of Stockings--If the covering of the button
on side elastics comes off, wind with a fine rubber band.

A Sewing Suggestion--A small, inexpensive flashlight should be
kept in the sewing machine drawer. It will not only save many
precious minutes, but will relieve eye strain when threading a
machine needle on a dark day or at night.

IN THE BEDROOM

To Clean Bed Springs--To clean the dust and dirt from bed
springs, set them out in the yard on a sunny day and turn the
hose on them freely. The sun and wind will afterward dry them in
a few minutes.

If Your Alarm Clock Rings Too Loudly, slip an elastic band
around the bell to diminish the noise. The wider the band that
is used, the greater will be the suppression.

Protection Against Spilled Water in Sick Bed--If water is
accidentally spilled in bed when attending someone who is ill,
it can be quickly dried by slipping a hot-water bag filled with
very hot water between the bed covers over the wet spot and
leaving it there for a few minutes.

To Clean and Polish Brass Beds--Brass bedsteads can be cleaned
by rubbing them with a cloth which has been slightly moistened
with sweet oil; then polished with a soft, dry duster, and
lastly with a chamois leather. If this is done occasionally, it
will keep them in good condition for years. But it is a better
plan to use the lacquer, given below, after cleaning.

Wooden bedsteads should be wiped every three months with a cloth
moistened with turpentine to keep them clean.

To Keep Brass from Tarnishing--To keep brass beds and other
forms of brass work from tarnishing, and also to avoid frequent
polishing, the brass should be lacquered with gum shellac
dissolved in alcohol. Apply the lacquer with a small paint
brush. Ten cents worth will lacquer a bedstead.

Clear, hard-drying varnish is also good for this purpose.

IN THE PARLOR

New Way to Fasten Lace Curtains--The best way to secure lace
or net curtains in place over the poles is to fasten with the
very fine wire hairpins, known as "invisible" hairpins. These
are so sharp that they can be pushed through the curtains
without injury to the fabric, and are so fine that they are more
invisible than pins. They have the added advantage of never
slipping out of place like small-headed pins, or becoming
entangled in the lace like safety-pins. Put them perpendicularly
(up and down) in the curtain with the rounded head at the top.

Filling for Sofa Cushions--Cut a roll of cotton in small
squares and put it in a pan in the oven and heat it for half an
hour. Do not let the cotton scorch. Every square will swell to
twice its original size and will be as light and fluffy as
feathers for stuffing sofa cushions.

To Brighten Carpets--Wipe them with warm water to which has
been added a few drops of ammonia.

To Clean Picture Glass--Clean the glass over pictures with a
cloth wrung from hot water and dipped in alcohol. Polish them
immediately, until they are dry and glossy, with a chamois or
tissue paper.

Polish for Leather Upholstered Furniture--Turpentine and
beeswax mixed to the consistency of thin cream makes a fine
polish for leather upholstered furniture.

To Fasten Small Pieces on Furniture--For fixing on small
pieces of wood chipped off furniture, use the white of an egg.

Onion Water for Gilt Frames--Flies may be kept from damaging
gilt frames by going over the frames with a soft brush dipped in
a pint of water in which three or four onions have been boiled.
This is also good for cleaning the frames.

To Remove Fly Specks from Gilding--Old ale is a good thing
with which to wash any gilding, as it acts at once on the fly
dirt. Apply with a soft rag.

To Clean Gilded Picture Frames, use a weak solution of ammonia
and water. Go over the gilt gently with a moist cloth, and after
a few moments, when the dirt has had time to soften, repeat the
operation. Do not rub hard, and dry by dabbing gently with a
soft cloth.

IN THE BATHROOM

For Clogged Lavatory Basins--Mix a handful of soda with a
handful of common salt and force it down the pipe; then rinse
the pipe thoroughly with boiling water.

To Clean Bath Tub and Wash Bowl--Some housekeepers like to use
kerosene in the bath tub to take off the soapsuds and stain that
will gather, but the odor is sometimes objectionable. To clean
the bath tub and the wash bowl in a jiffy use a half lemon rind
turned wrong side out.

To Clean Mirrors--A little camphor rubbed on a mirror after
the dust has been wiped off will brighten it wonderfully.

To Clean and Purify a Sponge--Rub a fresh lemon thoroughly
into a soured sponge and then rinse several times. The sponge
can be made as sweet as a new one.

IN THE LAUNDRY

To Clean Dirty Clothesline--Wrap it around the washboard and
scrub it with a brush and soap suds.

Brick for Iron Stand--If a brick is used for an iron stand,
the iron will hold its heat much longer than when an ordinary
stand is used.

Lemon for Whitening Clothes--Put a slice of lemon, with rind
on, in your boiler of clothes and it will remove stains and make
your clothes white without injuring them.

To Prevent Starch from Sticking to the Iron--Borax and oily
substances added to starch will increase the gloss on the
article to be ironed and will also prevent the starch from
sticking to the iron.

To Make Water Softer for Washing--Use four ounces of alcohol
and one-half ounce of ammonia. If used for toilet purposes add
to this one dram of oil of lavender.

A couple of teaspoonfuls of glycerine to a small tubful of water
will soften the lather in which flannel pieces are to be washed.

To Protect Hand from a Gasoline Iron--When using a gasoline
iron, a little steam always rises from the iron and burns the
hand. Before putting on your glove, rub the side of the hand
well with vaseline and this burning can be avoided.

To Prevent Woolen Blankets from Shrinking--After washing
woolen blankets put them on curtain stretchers to dry and
prevent shrinking.

To Restore Flannels, which have become hard and shrunken, to
their former softness, soak them in gasoline.

To Make Linen Glossy--When a gloss is desired for linen goods,
add a teaspoonful of salt to the starch when making.

Quick Method of Sprinkling Clothes--Turn the nozzle of the
garden hose to a fine spray and sprinkle the clothes while they
are on the line. All plain pieces can then be rolled up and laid
in the basket as they are taken down. Starched pieces may need a
little further hand sprinkling.

When Laundering Sash Curtains, never starch the hem; the rod can
then be run through it without danger of tearing.

To Clean Wringer Rollers--Kerosene is excellent for cleaning
the rubber rollers of a clothes wringer. After it has been
applied rinse the rollers off with warm water.

When Ironing Calicoes--Dark calicoes should always be ironed
on the wrong side of the goods with irons that are not too hot.

To Make White Curtains Ecru or Cream Color--First soak
curtains over night in cold water to remove all dust. In the
morning wash in usual way and rinse thoroughly to remove all
soap. Then put them in boiler with a tan stocking and remove
when the desired color is obtained.

To Stretch Curtains Without a Curtain Frame--Fold the lace
curtain double lengthwise; then pin it on a tightly stretched
line with many clothes-pins and slip a clean pole inside the
folded curtain. This stretches the curtain satisfactorily and
saves considerable time and money when a curtain stretcher is
not available.

Right Way to Hang Skirts--In laundering skirts made of pique,
cotton or woolen pin them to the line by the waistband so they
will hang straight down. If pinned this way they shrink evenly
all around instead of sagging, as they do when pinned at the
hem.

Bleaching a Scorched Spot--If you scorch a piece of white
goods while ironing, immediately rub the spot with a cloth
dipped in diluted peroxide, then run the iron over it and the
cloth will be as white as before.

To Iron Over Buttons, Etc.--When ironing over blouses or
frocks with large buttons or hooks and eyes on, use several
thicknesses of blanket or Turkish towels to iron them on. Turn
the garment button-side down, and press on the wrong side. The
buttons will sink into the soft padding and leave a smooth
surface for the iron to run over.

To Restore Color--When color on a fabric has been accidentally
or otherwise destroyed by acid, apply ammonia to neutralize the
same, after which an application of chloroform will usually
restore the original color. The use of ammonia is common, but
that of chloroform is but little known.

To Set Color in Wash Goods before laundering: Any colored fabric
should have color set before washing, using the method below
which is best suited to the goods:

For green, blue, pink, pinkish purple, lavender and aniline
reds, soak for 10 minutes in alum water, using three ounces of
alum to a tub of water.

For black-and-white, gray, purple, and dark blue, soak in salt
water, using a teaspoonful of common salt to a quart of water;
soak one hour and rinse thoroughly.

Dry in the shade. If in doubt about the goods, first try a small
piece of it as above and note carefully the result.

Vinegar is also considered good for dark colors, using
one-fourth cup of vinegar to one quart of water.

Sugar of lead is best for delicate greens, blues and tans. Use
one teaspoonful of sugar of lead to one quart of water.

To Get Rid of Ants--To rid the house of ants, smear the cracks
and corners of the infested rooms with balsam of peru.

MISCELLANEOUS

A Cheap Floor Wax--A satisfactory and economical floor wax
which is excellent for use on hardwood floors: To one-half cake
of melted paraffin add one teacupful of turpentine. Apply to the
clean dry floor with a cloth; then polish with a woolen cloth or
weighted brush. It gives an excellent polish and keeps the floor
nice and light.

To Loosen Screws and Nails which have become rusted into wood:

(1) Drop a little paraffin on them, and after a short time they
can easily be removed, or,

(2) Hold a red hot iron to the head of the screw for a short
time and use the screwdriver while the screw is still hot.

To Put Hooks in Hardwood--When putting hooks in hardwood, use
a clothes-pin to turn them, or slip the handle of a knife or any
small steel article through the hook and turn until it is secure
in the wood. This will save your fingers from aching.

Insoles from Old Felt Hats--Cut out pieces from old felt hats
big enough to fit the inside of your shoes. This makes a fine
insole, and is a great help to keep the feet warm.

Novelty Candle-Holders--Rosy-cheeked apples, polished and
hollowed out to receive the end of a candle, make charming
candle-sticks at a children's party. Especially where a color
scheme of red and white is carried out, nothing prettier or more
suitable could be designed.

Lime for Damp and Musty Cellars--A few lumps of unslaked lime
in the cellar will keep the air pure and sweet and also absorb
the dampness.

Handy Ice Pick--If an ice pick is not available or is
misplaced for the time being, an ordinary hat pin gradually
forced into ice produces a crack and separates the ice without a
sound. Needles and even common pins are used in hospitals to
crack ice for patients.

Help in Freezing Cream Quickly--If the freezer is packed half
an hour before the mixture is put in the can the freezing will
be speedier. Allow three times the quantity of ice that there is
of salt. Mix before using, or put in the freezer in layers.

Cutting Off Old Bottles and Their Uses--A bottle may be cut
off by wrapping a cord saturated in kerosene oil around it
several times at the point you wish to cut it, then setting fire
to the cord, and just when it has finished burning plunge the
bottle into cold water and tap the end you wish to break off.
Odd shaped or prettily colored bottles make nice vases. The top
of a large bottle with a small neck makes a good funnel. Large
round bottles make good jelly glasses.

Many other uses will no doubt suggest themselves to your mind.

More Serviceable Umbrella Jars--Place a large carriage sponge
in the bottom of the umbrella jar to prevent umbrellas from
striking the bottom of the jar and breaking it. The sponge will
also absorb the water from a dripping umbrella.

Squeaking Hammock--If your hammock has an annoying squeak
where the rope or chain is joined on the hook, slip the finger
from an old glove over the hook before putting on the rope or
chain.

To Lubricate a Clock--If your clock stops on account of being
gummed with dust, place a small piece of cotton saturated with
kerosene in the clock, and leave it there several hours. The
fumes from the kerosene will loosen the dirt, and the clock will
run again as well as ever.

A Grape-Basket for the Clothespins, with a wire hook fastened to
the handle, will save much time when hanging out clothes; it can
be pushed along the line and will always be handy for use.

For Worn Carpet Sweeper Pulleys--To keep the wood pulleys on
carpet sweeper brushes from slipping after they have worn
smooth, wrap once or twice with adhesive tape. This will also
keep the pulleys from wearing unevenly with the grain of the
wood.

To Protect Clothing Spread on the Grass for Bleaching--When
linen pieces or small articles of clothing are placed upon the
grass to whiten, much trouble may be prevented by spreading a
strip of cheesecloth over them and fastening it down with wooden
pegs or hairpins. This does not prevent bleaching, but keeps off
worms and bugs, and prevents the articles from being blown away
by the wind.

To Soften Paint Brushes that have been used for varnishing and
not been cleaned, soak them in turpentine.

To soften brushes that have dried paint in them soak in hot
vinegar or in turpentine or gasoline.

Vinegar for Dried Mucilage--When mucilage has dried at the
bottom of the bottle, pour a spoonful or two of vinegar in it,
and let it stand awhile. The mucilage will be as good as ever.

To Remove Paper Labels, wet the face of the label with water and
hold it near a flame or stove.

To Separate Postage Stamps--When postage stamps stick together
do not soak them. Instead, lay a thin paper over them, and run a
hot iron over the paper. They will come apart easily and the
mucilage on the back of the stamps can be used as though it was
new.

Soap Application When Eyeglasses Steam--To prevent annoyance
caused by a deposit of moisture upon eyeglasses, when going from
a cold into a warm atmosphere, moisten the tips of the fingers
and rub them over a cake of soap. Then rub them over the lens,
and polish as usual. One application every day or two is all
that is necessary.

For the Invalid's Room--A few drops of oil of lavender in
boiling water is excellent for the invalid's room.

For Perspiration Odor--The unpleasant odor of perspiration often
causes much annoyance. Instead of using perfumery, wash the body
with warm water to which has been added two tablespoonfuls of
compound spirits of ammonia. This will leave the skin sweet,
clean, and fresh.

For a Sprain--Salt and vinegar, bound on a sprain, will
relieve the pain in a very little while.

To Prevent a Blister on the Heel--If shoes slip and cause
blisters on the heels, rub paraffin on the stocking. In a short
time the slipping will stop.

For Burns, Etc.--If you burn your finger or hand make a strong
solution of bluing water and soak the affected part in it for
ten minutes, or longer if necessary. The pain will quickly
disappear and no soreness will result.

For Insomnia--A heaping bowl of bread and milk, seasoned with
salt, and eaten just before retiring, is recommended as a sure
cure for the worst case of insomnia.

Sulphur to Rid House of Rats--Sulphur will successfully rid
the house of rats if sprinkled in bureau drawers, closets, and
around holes where they are liable to come in. The farmer, also,
will find that his corn will not be troubled if he sprinkles it
about the barn.

To Get Rid of Mice--Mice do not like the smell of peppermint,
and a little oil of peppermint placed about their haunts will
soon force them to look for other quarters.

Lumps of camphor placed about their haunts is another effective
method of keeping mice away.

To Kill Weeds--If annoyed with dock, dandelion, or other
weeds, fill an oil-can with kerosene. With a knife cut the weed
off at the ground, or just below, and put a drop or two of
kerosene on the heart of the weed. It will not grow again
afterward.

To Take Mildew Out of Leather--Mildew on leather may be
removed with pure vaseline. Rub a little of this into the
leather until quite absorbed, and then polish carefully with a
clean chamois leather.

To Destroy Earthworms--To rid the earth in flower-pots of
worms, mix a small quantity of finely-pulverized tobacco with
the earth in each.

To Induce a Canary to Take a Bath, sprinkle a few seeds on the
water. This added attraction will make the bath become a habit
with the little pet.

A Cure for Leaky Pens--Empty the fountain pen and clean it
thoroughly; fill with ink and apply some soap to the threads of
the screw.

If Your Fingers Become Stained with Ink, wet the head of a match
and rub it on the spots. Then rinse the fingers with soap and
water and the ink will quickly disappear.

A Handy Pen or Brush Holder for Your Desk--A sheet of
corrugated paper is a handy thing to have on your writing desk
to hold wet pens or brushes. The paper will absorb the liquid
and the corrugations will hold the pens or brushes in convenient
position.

A Novel Match Scratcher--To avoid matches being scratched on
the wall-paper almost as much as on the match-scratch, try the
idea of removing the glass from a small oval or square picture
frame and framing a piece of sandpaper just as one would a
picture. Put a small screw-eye on top of the frame, thus
allowing it to hang perfectly flat against the wall. The frame
prevents the match from being carried over the edges of the
sandpaper onto the wall.

Emergency White Glove Repair--If your white glove rips or
tears accidentally just as you are putting it on to go out, and
there is no time to mend same, put a small strip of white
adhesive plaster over the spot and it will never be noticed.

To Keep Rugs from Slipping--Cut a three-cornered piece of
rubber sheeting to fit each corner and sew it firmly in place.
Another way is to take a piece of heavy, rough sheathing paper a
bit smaller than the rug and lay the rug on that.

For Sagging Chair Seats--When cane-seated chairs sag they can
be tightened by washing the bottom of the cane in hot water
and soap; then rinse in clean water and dry out-of-doors.

Two Uses for Velveteen--Old velveteen, fastened over a firm
broom, is excellent for wiping down walls.

To polish furniture, use a piece of velveteen instead of chamois
leather. The former is much cheaper than the chamois and serves
just as well.

Saltpeter for Icy Steps--Ice on marble or stone steps can be
thawed by sprinkling several handfuls of saltpeter on it.

An Easy Fly Exterminator--To drive out flies put twenty drops
of oil of lavender in a saucer and dilute it slightly with hot
water. The sweet, heavy odor of the lavender is very disagreeable
to the flies, and the house will soon be rid of them.

To Avoid Mistakes with Poison--When poison is kept in the
house, push two stout, sharp-pointed pins through the corks
crosswise. The pricking points remind even the most careless
person of danger.

To Pick Up Broken Glass--Even the smallest pieces of broken
glass can be easily picked up by using a bit of wet absorbent
cotton, which can afterward be destroyed by burning.

For Leaky Vases or Other Ornamental Bric-a-Brac--If a valuable
flower vase leaks, take some melted paraffin, such as is used
over jelly-jars, and pour it into the vase and let it harden
over the spot where the leak occurs. It will not leak again.

Polish for Floors--Rub polished floors with a mixture of
one-third raw linseed oil and two-thirds paraffin. Afterward
polish with a dry cloth.

To Prevent a Rocking Chair from Creeping across the room while
rocking in it, glue strips of velvet on bottom of chair rockers,
and the annoyance will cease.

To Mark Place for Picture-Nail--When just the right position
has been found to hang the picture, moisten your finger and
press it against the place where the nail should go. This does
away with the awkward reaching for hammer and nail while holding
the picture against the wall.

An Unbreakable Bead Chain--A violin string makes an excellent
chain for stringing beads. It will stand a great amount of wear
and tear and will practically last forever.

When Packing Flowers for Transportation--When flowers are to
be sent some distance it is a good plan to place the ends of the
stems in a raw potato. They will keep as fresh as if in water.

(1) To Keep Flowers Fresh--To keep flowers fresh put a small
piece of sugar in the water.

(2) To Keep Flowers Fresh, place a pinch of bicarbonate of soda
in the water before putting them into a vase.

(3) Cut flowers with woody stems will last much longer in water
if the stalks are scraped for about three inches up.

When Taking Down Pictures in House-Cleaning Time a stick with a
deep notch in the end, to lift picture-cords from hooks, is a
great convenience.

To Tighten Your Eyeglasses--If the tiny screws in your
eyeglasses need tightening, you will find that a small steel pen
answers as well as a screwdriver.

To Mend Celluloid--Moisten the broken edges with glacial
acetic acid and hold them together until the acid dries.

To Clean White Enameled Furniture--First remove all dirty
marks with a flannel cloth dipped in wood alcohol. Then wash at
once with tepid water to which has been added a little fine
oatmeal. Never use soap or soda.

Felt for Dining-Chair Legs--Thin strips of felt glued to the
bottom of dining-chair legs will deaden the noise and save the
hardwood floors.

When Baby Chokes--A choking infant can be quickly relieved by
pressing between its eyes with your thumb and finger.

To Remove a Fishbone from the Throat--Cut a lemon in two and
suck the juice slowly. This will soften the fishbone and give
instant relief.

New Uses for Macaroni--A stick of macaroni will serve in place
of a glass tube for a patient who cannot sit up in bed to drink,
or will sometimes induce a child to drink its milk when
otherwise it would not.

For the Restless Baby--When the creeping baby is placed on the
bed for his daily nap, use a large safety-pin to pin his clothes
to the bed, or to a strap fastened to the head or foot of the
bed.

To Drive Nails in Plaster without cracking the plaster, put the
nail in hot water for a few minutes and it can then be driven in
securely without damage to the wall.

Plaster of Paris for Mending Walls--When painting walls and
the plaster is in need of mending, fix it with plaster of paris
mixed with some of the paint you intend using to paint it with.
This will prevent the mended spot from showing. To fix a white
wall, mix plaster of paris with turpentine and oil.

To Remove Smoke Marks from the Ceiling, frequently due to a
smoky lamp, mix a thick paste of starch and water, and with a
clean flannel cloth spread it over the entire mark. Allow it to
stay on until thoroughly dry, then brush off with a soft brush,
and the discoloration will disappear like magic.

To Clean a Raincoat--Use either of the two following methods:

(1) Use soap and water and not gasoline, as gasoline will injure
the rubber. Lay out on a flat surface and scrub lightly with
soap and water; then rinse with clear water. Do not wring. Put
on a coat-hanger and hang out to dry.

(2) Pour some vinegar into a dish and dip a soft rag or sponge
into it; then place the mackintosh on the table and rub the
soiled parts lightly.

If a Bug or Other Small Insect Gets in the Ear and causes severe
pain, pour a little melted butter in the ear and there will be
instant relief.

To Remove Soot from Carpet--Do not attempt to sweep the carpet
until it has been covered with dry salt. Then sweep it and no
smear will be left.

To Brighten a Carpet--First sweep the carpet clean. Then dip a
soft, clean mop into a pail containing one-half gallon of water
and one-half teacupful of ammonia; wring it well and rub it over
the carpet; it will be as bright and fluffy as when new.

To Destroy Moths in Carpets, wring a thick towel out of water,
spread it on the carpet, and iron over it with a very hot iron.
The heat and steam will go through the carpet, thus destroying
the grubs.

A Moth Preventive--If you wish to be rid of moths, pour a
little turpentine in the corners of the wardrobe, chiffonier, or
trunk.

To Keep Moths Out of Pianos--Try rubbing turpentine
occasionally over the woodwork on the inside of the piano, and
you will never be troubled with moths getting into the piano,
even when it is not used for a long time.

To Clean Gilt Frames, dip a soft cloth in the white of egg and
gently rub off the soiled spots.

To Remove Ink Stains from an Oak Table, lay spirits of wine on
the marks; let it remain for some time, then rub well and clean
off.

To Clean Leather Furniture, add a little vinegar to warm water
(not hot) and brush the leather over with it. Restore the polish
by rubbing with two tablespoonfuls of turpentine mixed with the
whites of two eggs.

To Clean Bronze, make the article very hot by placing it in
boiling water; then rub it well with a piece of flannel cloth
dipped in soapsuds, and dry with a chamois leather.

To Clean Zinc--Take a thick slice of lemon and rub it over the
stained spots. Let it remain for an hour, then wash the zinc
metal with soap and water and it will become clean and bright.

To Clean Brass--To keep the polish on brass, after polishing
in the usual way, coat with clear varnish. The following is a
good polish:

To clean tarnished brass use equal parts of vinegar and salt.
Rub with this mixture thoroughly, letting it dry on; then wash
off in warm, soapy water and polish with a soft cloth.

Cleaning with Gasoline--The three following suggestions are
made with reference to cleaning with gasoline:

(1) To take the odor of gasoline out of freshly cleaned
garments, use oil of sassafras in the gasoline to the proportion
of about five drops to a quart of gasoline.

(2) If a little salt is added to gasoline which is used for
cleaning wool or silk material, there will be no ring remaining
when dry.

(3) Put about one-third part of vinegar in the water with which
you dampen the cloth when pressing an article that has been
cleaned with gasoline. This will not only remove the scent of
the gasoline but will prevent circles forming.

Alcohol for Cleaning White Kid Articles--Pure alcohol is
better than gasoline for cleaning white kid gloves or other
white kid articles, as it dries quickly without the unpleasant
odor that gasoline leaves. Five cents' worth of alcohol cleans a
pair of gloves beautifully.

To Clean White Kid Shoes--Make a lather of pure white soap and
milk for cleaning white kid shoes. Brush as much dirt as
possible off the shoes before scrubbing with the lather.

If New Boots or Shoes Will Not Polish, rub them over with half a
lemon and leave until thoroughly dry. Repeat this once or twice
if necessary.

New Tag for Shoe Lace--If a tag comes off a boot or shoe lace,
press a little melted black sealing wax round the end of the
lace and shape it to form a tag. It will serve almost as well as
the original.

To Renovate a Shabby Serge Skirt, sponge it over with hot
vinegar until the stains and grease marks disappear; then
thoroughly press on the wrong side with a fairly hot iron.

To Remove Shine from Woolen Goods--Wet a piece of crinoline
and lay it over the shiny surface of the goods. Cover with a dry
cloth and press with a hot iron. Pull the crinoline away
quickly, as you would a plaster, and this will raise the nap of
the goods.

To Remove Shine from Black Cloth, rub it well with a piece of
flannel dipped in spirits of turpentine and dry in the open air.

To Clean a Black Dress--Take a dozen ivy leaves and steep them
in boiling water. Let it stand until cold; then rub well over
the stained parts. This solution will remove all stains and make
the cloth look fresh.

To Clean Men's Clothing--Take a soft cloth, dip it in alcohol,
and press it lightly over a cake of pure soap; then apply it
briskly to the article to be cleaned. After sponging the garment
carefully, press it.

In cases of obstinate grease spots, rub well with a lather made
from pure white soap and luke-warm water; then sponge off with
alcohol and proceed as above.

Wall Paper Remover--To remove wall paper in about one-half the
usual time, take one heaping tablespoonful of saltpetre to a
gallon of hot water, and apply it to the paper freely with a
brush. A whitewash brush is best for the purpose, as it covers a
broader space than other brushes. Keep the water hot, and after
a few applications the paper can be easily pulled from the wall.

To Clean Wallpaper, make a paste of three cupfuls of flour,
three tablespoonfuls of ammonia and one and one-half cupfuls of
water. Roll it into balls and rub it over the paper. It will
make it as clean as when new.

Tobacco for Plant Insects--One tablespoonful of smoking
tobacco soaked in a quart of water for twelve hours or more
makes a solution that will destroy insects and promote the
growth of the plant. It must be poured on the soil about every
two months.

When a Wax Candle is Too Large for the holder the end should be
held in hot water until it is soft. It can then be pressed into
shape to fit the hole and there will be no waste of wax, as when
slices are shaved off the end of a candle.

Salt Water to Clean Matting--A cloth dampened in salt water is
the best thing for cleaning matting.

To Lay New Matting--Cut each width six inches longer than
necessary. Then unravel the ends and tie the cords together.
When the matting is taken up to be cleaned it cannot unravel and
there will be no waste.

To Clean White Furniture or Woodwork--Use clean turpentine and
a soft cloth to clean white enameled woodwork or furniture. It
will remove all spots without removing any of the gloss, as soap
is liable to do.

To Remove Spots from Varnished Wood--Spots made by water on
varnished tables or other furniture may be removed by rubbing
them with a cloth wet with camphor.

To Clean Greasy Woodwork--Paint or woodwork that has become
greasy can be cleaned with a cloth dipped in turpentine. Then
wipe with a cloth dipped in water to which a little kerosene has
been added.

To Clean Soiled Marble--Pound two parts of common washing
soda, one part each of pumice stone and finely powdered chalk,
mix together, sift them through cheesecloth, and make into a
paste with water. Apply thickly and let it dry on; then wash
well with soap and water and rub well with a soft cloth. Never
use acids on marble as they destroy the gloss.

To Clean Oil Spots from Marble, first wash the stone thoroughly;
then place a sheet of blotting paper over the spots and set a
hot iron on it; this will draw the oil out and the blotting
paper will absorb it.

Handy Fruit Picker for Farmers and Suburbanites--Take a large
tomato can or other tin can and cut a V-shaped hole in one side
at the top, about 1-1/2 inches wide and 2-1/2 inches deep. On
the opposite side of the V-shaped hole, nail the can to a long
pole. This device is useful for picking apples and many
varieties of fruit from upper branches where it is almost
impossible to reach them by ladder. It also prevents damage to
the fruit by falling.

TO REMOVE STAINS, ETC.

All spots and stains can be removed much more easily before
washing. Fruit stains are probably the most common and they will
usually disappear if the stained portion is held taut over a
basin and hot water poured over and through it.

Butter or Salt for Stains--To remove fruit, tea or coffee
stains from cotton or linen goods, rub butter on the stains and
then wash with hot water and soap. Remove wine stains by
sprinkling salt on them and then pouring boiling water through
them.

To Remove Indelible Ink--Use equal parts of turpentine and
ammonia to remove indelible ink when all other methods fail.
Saturate the garment well, and let it soak; then rinse it
thoroughly in warm water.

To Remove Grease Stains from White Woolens, use cream of tartar
and water or alcohol.

To Remove Perspiration Stains--The stains caused by
perspiration can be removed from garments by the application of
a mixture consisting of three parts of alcohol, three parts of
ether and one of ammonia.

Salt to Remove Perspiration Stains--To remove perspiration
stains from clothing, soak the garments in strong salt water
before laundering them.

To Remove the Stain of Mud from clothing, rub well with a raw
potato.

To Remove Fruit Stains from Linen the following suggestions are
given:

(1) Fruit Stains on Linen should be smeared with glycerine and
left for about an hour; then wash the stains in warm soapy
water. Repeat the process if necessary.

(2) To Remove Fruit Stains from Linen--Before sending table
linen and white garments to the laundry all fruit stains should
be well dampened with alcohol. All traces of discoloration from
the fruit will have vanished when returned from the laundry.

(3) To Remove Fruit Stains from the Tablecloth, apply powdered
starch while fresh.

Starch for Removing Blood-Stains--To remove blood-stains from
material which can not be washed, cover the stain with lump
starch that has been dampened to about the consistency of very
thick paste. As the starch dries, the stain will go.

To Remove Mildew--The four following methods are given for
removing mildew:

(1) Buttermilk for Mildew--Articles that have become mildewed
should be boiled in buttermilk. Rinse well in warm water after
boiling and hang in the sun. The same process will effectively
bleach materials that have grown yellow from lack of use.

(2) Salt for Mildew--Mildew can be taken out by rubbing the
stains well with a fresh tomato and covering with salt;
afterward place garment in sun.

(3) To Take Out Mildew, mix equal parts of powdered borax and
starch with half as much salt; moisten the whole with lemon
juice, spread the mixture on the mildewed spot and place the
garment in the sun on the grass. Renew the mixture every morning
until the stain disappears.

(4) Alcohol for Mildew--Mildew may generally be removed by
dipping articles into alcohol.

To Remove Road Oil--Kerosene is best to take out road oil on
most fabrics, as it evaporates and does not injure same.

To Remove Wax Stains--To remove wax or tallow stains, lay a
piece of brown paper over them and apply a hot flatiron. After
one or two applications the paper will absorb all of the wax or
tallow from the cloth, leaving no trace behind.

To Remove Tar Spots, put a little lard on the spots and let them
stand for a few hours, then wash with soap and water.

To Remove Iodine Stains, immediately immerse the stained article
in a gallon of water to which has been added about two teaspoonfuls
of plain household ammonia.

To Remove Blueberry Stains--Blueberry stains may be removed by
washing at once with cold water and white soap.

To Remove Grease Spots--To remove automobile grease, or any
dark, heavy grease, from washable fabric, apply a small piece of
butter and rub it in well; then wash with soap and rinse.

To Remove Tea and Coffee Stains from any white goods, soak the
spots with glycerine and let them stand for several hours
untouched. Afterward wash with soap and water.

To Remove Grease Spots from Tablecloths, coats, trousers, etc.,
sandwich the article between two pieces of blotting paper and
rest a hot iron over the damaged part for a few minutes.

To Remove Rust Stains, the three following suggestions are
given:

(1) Tomato Juice for Iron Rust--Tomato juice will remove iron
rust and fruit stains from wash goods.

(2) Rhubarb Juice for Rust Stains--The worst rust stains can
be removed without injury to the fabric by the application of
boiling rhubarb juice.

(3) To Remove Rust Stains--Spread the rust-stained part over a
bowl of boiling water and rub it with salt wet with lemon juice;
then place it in the sun. Repeat this process until the stain is
light yellow; then wash the cloth in weak ammonia water and
afterward in clear water.

To Remove Ink Stains--The following various methods are
recommended for removing ink stains:

Chinese Plan for Removing Ink Stains from Clothing--Wash the
article with boiled rice; rub the rice on the stain as you would
soap, and wash with clear water. If first application is not
effective, repeat the process.

This has been found to work like magic, even with stains not
discovered until entirely dry.

A Sure Cure for Ink Stains--To remove ink stains from wash
materials pour a tablespoonful of kerosene on them and rub well;
then rinse in kerosene and the spots will immediately disappear.
This should be done before being washed.

To Remove Ink Stains--To remove ink stains without damage to
the fabric, place the stained portion over a saucer and cover
the stain with powdered borax; then pour peroxide of hydrogen
over the borax. Do not pour water over the borax. The stain will
disappear almost immediately.

Ink Stains Can be Removed without injury to the most
delicately-colored material. Mix some mustard to a thick paste
and spread it over the stain. After twenty-four hours sponge
thoroughly with cold water; no trace of the ink will remain.

To Remove Ink from Linen After it Has Dried In--Wash out as
much of the ink as possible in a pan of milk. Then put the
article to soak in another pan of milk, letting it stand until
the milk turns to clabber. Then wash out and not a trace of ink
will remain.

Ink on Carpet--If ink is spilled on the carpet, wash it out at
once with sweet milk and sprinkle it with white cornmeal. Let it
remain over night. The next morning sweep it up and the colors
will remain bright.

To Remove Ink from a Carpet, soak up as much of it as possible
with blotting paper. Then saturate the spot with plenty of milk,
and after some time, having removed the milk with blotting
paper, rub the carpet with a clean cloth.

INDEX TO GAS AND ELECTRIC SUPPLEMENT

 The Care and Use of Gas Appliances    1a
    Care of Gas Ranges    1a
    Use of the Range    2a
    Broiling and Roasting    2a
    Steaks and Chops    3a
    Fish    3a
    Other Foods    3a
    Roast Meats    3a
    Baking    3a
    Bread    3a
    Biscuits    4a
    Loaf Cake    4a
    Layer Cake    4a
    Boiling    4a
    Stewing    4a
 Toasters    5a
 Gas Water Heaters    5a
 Gas Flat Irons    6a
 Furnace Connections    6a
 All-Gas Kitchens    6a
 Demonstrator    6a
 Gas Lighting    7a

 Electrical Appliances    8a
    Electric Service in the Home    8a
    All-Electric Homes    8a
    Electric Range    9a
    Electric Dishwasher    9a
    Vacuum Cleaner    10a
    Sewing Machine    11a
    Flat Iron    11a
    Electric Lamps    11a
       Table of Comparisons    12a
 Residential Lighting    12a
    Parlor    12a
    Hall    12a
    Porch    12a
    Bedroom    12a
    Sitting-room    12a
    Dining-room    13a
    Bathroom    13a
    Kitchen    13a
    Attic    13a
    Cellar    13a
    Care of Lamps and Fixtures    13a
 Fixture Recommendations for the House    13a
    Parlor    13a
    Hall    14a
    Sitting-room and Library    14a
    Bedroom    14a
    Dining-room    14a
    Bathroom    14a
    Kitchen    14a
    Cellar    14a
    Attic    14a
    Clothes Press    15a
 General    15a
 Wiring Hints    15a
 Fuses    16a

INDEX TO HOUSEHOLD HELPS

 Alarm Clock, To Diminish Noise of    17
 Ammonia, Many Uses of    12
 Ants, To Get Rid of    22
 Apple Pie, To Make Tender    8
 Apples, To Peel Easily    7

 Baby, Choking, To Relieve    29
 Baby, Restless, Hint for    30
 Bacon, Proper Way to Slice    3
 Bath Tub and Wash Bowl, To Clean    19
 Bead Chain, An Unbreakable    29
 Beans, Hint for Baking    6
 Bed Springs, How to Clean    17
 Beef Juice, Squeezer for    2
 Beetles, To Get Rid of 7
 Black Cloth and Woolen Goods, To Remove Shine from    33
 Black Dress, How to Clean    33
 Blankets, Woolen, To Prevent Shrinking    20
 Bleaching Clothes, To Protect    25
 Blister on Heel, To Prevent    26
 Boiling Eggs, Hints for (four)    9
 Bottles, How to Cut Off, and Their Uses    24
 Bottles, Glass, How to Clean    15
 Brass Beds, Polish for    17
 Brass, How to Clean    32
 Brass, To Keep from Tarnishing    18
 Bread, Cornpopper for Toasting    2
 Bread, Hint When Baking    5
 Bread, To Keep Fresh    9
 Bread, When Too Brown    7
 Broken Glass, To Gather Up    28
 Bronze Articles, To Clean    31
 Brushes, Paint, How to Soften    25
 Bug or Other Small Insect in Ear, Relief for    31
 Burners, Gas Stove, To Clean    3
 Burns, Remedy for    10, 26
 Butter, How to Soften When Hard    1

 Cake Flavoring, Orange Peel for    6
 Cake, To Prevent Burning    4
 Cake, To Prevent Sticking to Tins    6
 Cake, To Remove from Tin    6
 Cake, To Remove Scorch from    8
 Calicoes, Dark, How to Iron    21
 Canary, To Induce to Bathe    27
 Candle Holders, Novelty for Children's Party    23
 Candles, Economy in Use of    7
 Candle, Wax, Hint Regarding    34
 Carpets, Ink on, To Remove    38
 Carpet, Soot on, To Remove    31
 Carpets, To Brighten    18, 31
 Carpet Sweeper Pulleys, Worn, To Repair    24
 Carrots, Quick Way to Peel    3
 Cellars, Damp or Musty, Remedy for    23
 Celluloid, How to Mend    29
 Chair Seats, Cane, To Tighten    27
 Chapped Hands, To Prevent    2
 Chicken, To Make Tender    8
 Chimneys, Lamps and Wicks, Hints for (five)    12
 China, Hints for Mending (four)    13
 Choking Baby, To Relieve    29
 Chopper, Food, Sand Soap to Sharpen    1
 Clock, How to Lubricate    24
 Clothes, Bleaching, To Protect    25
 Clothes, To Sprinkle Quickly    21
 Clothes, To Whiten When Washing    20
 Clothesline, Dirty, To Clean    20
 Clothespins, Grape Basket for    24
 Clothing, Men's, To Clean    33
 Cockroaches, To Get Rid of    7
 Color, To Restore in Fabrics    22
 Color, To Set in Wash Goods    22
 Cooling Hot Dishes, Hint for    13
 Corn Silk, To Remove from Corn    10
 Cream, To Use When it is on the Turn    3
 Crockery, Hints for Mending (four)    13
 Curtains, Lace, New Way to Fasten    18
 Curtains, Lace, To Stretch Without Frame    21
 Curtains, Sash, Hint for Laundering    21
 Curtains, White, To Make Ecru or Cream Color    21
 Cushions, Sofa, Etc., Hint for Filling    18
 Cut Glass, Polish for    18

 Damp Cellars, or Musty, Remedy for    23
 Dining-Chair Legs, To Protect Floors from    29
 Dishcloth, Best Kind of    10
 Dishes, Greasy, To Clean    4
 Dishes, Loaned, To Identify    11
 Dress, Black, How to Clean    33
 Dust, To Prevent When Sweeping    14
 Dustless Mop, How to Make    15

 Earthworms in Flower Pots, To Destroy    27
 Eggs, Boiling, Hints for (four)    8
 Eggs, To Prevent Popping When Cooking    8
 Eggs, Yolks of, To Keep Fresh    8
 Egg Shells, To Remove from Cooking    8
 Egg Stains, To Remove from Silver    7
 Eyeglasses, How to Tighten Screws    29
 Eyeglasses, To Prevent Steaming    25

 Faucets, How to Polish    7
 Finger Nails, To Prevent Staining    2
 Fire, Kerosene, To Extinguish    3
 Fish, To Prevent Breaking Up When Frying    6
 Fish, Currycomb for Scaling    1
 Fishbone in Throat, To Remove    30
 Fish Odor, To Remove from Hands    5
 Fish Taste, To Remove from Forks and Spoons    5
 Flannels, To Restore When Hard or Shrunken    20
 Flashlight for Sewing Machine, Use of    17
 Flat-irons, To Remove Rust from    4
 Flies, To Get Rid of    7
 Floor, Kitchen, To Remove Grease from    10
 Floor Polisher, Worn out Broom for    9
 Floors, Polished, Finish for    28
 Floor Wax, A Cheap and Good    23
 Fly Exterminator, An Easy    28
 Food, Too Salty, Remedy for    5
 Food Chopper, Sand Soap to Sharpen    1
 Food Chopper, To Fasten Securely    11
 Fountain Pens, Leaky, Cure for    27
 Fowl, To Make Tender    8
 Frames, Gilt, To Clean and Remove Fly Specks from    19
 Fruit Jars, To Open    1, 11
 Fruit Picker, Handy, for Farmer or Suburbanite    35
 Furniture, Leather, To Clean    31, 35
 Furniture, To Mend Small Pieces on    19
 Furniture, White Enameled, or Woodwork, To Clean    29, 34
 Flowers, How to Pack for Transportation    29
 Flowers, To Keep Fresh (three)    29

 Gas, Good Way to Save    10
 Gasoline Iron, To Protect Hand from    20
 Gasoline, Hints for Cleaning With (three)    32
 Gas Stove Burners, To Clean    3
 Gems, Hint for Baking    6
 Gems and Muffins, To Make Lighter    8
 Gilt Frames, To Clean and Remove Fly Specks from    19, 31
 Glass, Broken, To Gather Up    28
 Glass, Drinking, Etc., To Prevent Breaking    1
 Glass, Polish for    11
 Glove Repair, White, Emergency    27
 Grease, To Remove from Kitchen Floor    10
 Greasy Woodwork, To Clean

 Hammock, Squeaky, Remedy for    24
 Hands, Chapped, To Prevent    2
 Hands, To Remove Fish Odor from    5
 Hands, To Remove Odors from    7
 Hands, To Remove Stains from    2
 Hooks in Hardwood, How to Put in    23

 Ice Cream, To Freeze Quickly    24
 Ice Pick, Handy, for Emergency    23
 Icy Steps, Etc., Remedy for    28
 Ink Stains on Fingers, To Remove    27
 Ink Stains on Linen, Carpets, Etc., To Remove    38
 Ink Stains on Oak Table, To Remove    31
 Insect in Ear, Relief for    31
 Insects, To Remove from Vegetables When Washing    11
 Insects, Plant, To Destroy    33
 Insoles from Old Felt    23
 Insomnia, Cure for    26
 Invalid's Room, Perfume for    25
 Iron, Gasoline, To Protect Hand from    20
 Ironing Over Buttons, Etc., Hint for    22
 Iron Stand, Brick for    20

 Kerosene Fire, To Extinguish    3
 Kerosene for Water Bugs    1
 Kettles and Pans, Greasy, To Clean    2
 Kitchen Floor, Etc., Finish for    14
 Kitchen Memoranda, Tablet or Slate for    11
 Knife Handles, White, To Clean    14

 Labels, Paper, To Remove    25
 Lace Curtains, New Way to Fasten    18
 Lace Curtains, To Stretch Without Frame    21
 Lamps, Wicks and Chimneys, Hints for (Five)    12
 Leather Furniture, To Clean    31
 Leather Upholstery, Polish for    19
 Lemons, To Increase Juice from    3
 Lemons, Old, To Freshen    9
 Lid, To Keep on Boiling Pot    5
 Linen, To Make Glossy    21
 Linen, To Remove Stains from    35 - 38
 Linoleum, To Clean    16
 Linoleum, Varnish and Polish for    16
 Loaned Dishes, To Identify    11

 Macaroni, Two New Uses for    30
 Machine Oil, To Prevent Soiling Goods    16
 Marble, To Clean Soil or Oil Spots from    34
 Match Scratcher, Novel and Useful    27
 Matting, How to Clean and Lay    34
 Meat, Roast, To Prevent Drying Out    5
 Meat, To Make Tender    5
 Meat, To Prevent Scorching    8
 Mending China and Crockery, Hints for (four)    13
 Mica in Stove Doors, To Clean    13
 Mice, To Get Rid of    26
 Mildew in Leather, To Remove    26
 Mildew in Cloth, To Remove (four)    39
 Mirrors, To Clean    19
 Mixing Board, Best Kind of    4
 Moth Preventive    31
 Moths in Carpet, To Destroy    31
 Moths, To Keep Out of Piano    31
 Mucilage, Dried, To Restore    25
 Muffins and Gems, To Make Lighter    8
 Mushrooms, How to Judge    6

 Nails in Plaster, To Drive Without Damage    30
 Newspapers, Old, Use for    3
 Nuts, Pecan, How to Crack    2

 Odor, Perspiration, To Remove    25
 Odors, To Remove from Hands    7
 Oil Lamps, Wicks and Chimneys, Hints for (five)    12
 Oil, Machine, To Prevent Soiling Goods    16
 Oil Spots, Sewing Machine, To Remove    17
 Onion Smell, To Remove from Pans    5
 Onions, To Prevent Eyes Watering When Peeling    5

 Paint Brushes, How to Soften    25
 Pans and Kettles, Greasy, To Clean    2
 Pastry, To Prevent Burning    4
 Pecan Nuts, How to Crack    2
 Pen or Brush Holder, Handy, for Desk    27
 Perspiration of Hands When Sewing, To Prevent    16
 Perspiration Odor, To Remove    25
 Picture Glass, How to Clean    18
 Picture Nail, To Mark Place for    28
 Pictures, Hint for Taking from Wall    29
 Pie Crust, To Make Flaky    8
 Pies, Wire Rack for Cooling    4
 Plant Insects, To Destroy    33
 Poison, To Avoid Mistakes With    28
 Polisher for Stove When Hot    4
 Postage Stamps, How to Separate    25
 Potatoes, Sweet, To Peel Easily    4
 Pots, Hint for Cleaning    6

 Raincoat, How to Clean (two)    30
 Rats, To Rid House of    26
 Refrigerator, To Keep Sweet    1
 Rice, Hint for Boiling    6
 Roasted Meat, To Prevent Drying Out    5
 Rocking Chair, To Prevent Creeping Over Floor    28
 Rugs, To Prevent Slipping on Floor    27
 Rust and Stains in Tinware, To Remove and Prevent    11, 14
 Rust, To Remove from Flat-irons    4

 Salty Food, Remedy for    5
 Sash Curtains, Hint for Laundering    21
 Scalds, Remedy for    10
 Scissors, To Sharpen    16
 Scorch, To Remove from Cake    8
 Scorched Spot, To Bleach    21
 Scorched Vegetables, Etc., Remedy for    7
 Screws and Nails, Rusty, To Loosen    23
 Serge Skirt, Shabby, To Renovate    32
 Sewing Machine Belt, To Tighten    16
 Sewing Machine Oil Spots, To Remove    17
 Shine on Woolen Goods and Black Cloth, To Remove    33
 Shoe Lace, New Tag for    32
 Shoes or Boots, To Make Them Take Polish    32
 Shoes, White Kid, To Clean    32
 Silver, Hint for Washing    4
 Silver, To Remove Egg Stains from    7
 Silver, Tarnished, To Clean    14
 Skirts, Right Way to Hang    21
 Smoke Marks on Ceiling, To Remove    30
 Sofa Cushions, Etc., Hint for Filling    18
 Soot on Carpet, To Remove    31
 Soup, Best Way to Strain    2
 Spectacles, To Prevent Steaming    25
 Spiders, To Get Rid of    7
 Spilled Water in Sick Bed, Remedy for    17
 Sponge, To Clean and Purify    20
 Spots on Varnished Wood, To Remove    34
 Sprain, To Relieve    26
 Stains, All Kinds, To Remove    35 - 38
 Stain, Cheap, for Wood Floors    16
 Stains, To Remove from Hands    2
 Stains Under Finger Nails, To Prevent    2
 Stamps, Postage, How to Separate    25
 Starch, To Prevent Sticking to Iron    20
 Stockings, To Pair    17
 Stockings, To Prevent Cutting by Elastic    17
 Stove, Polisher for Hot    4
 Sweeping, To Prevent Dust When    14
 Sweet Potatoes, To Peel Easily    4

 Tea Caddy, Orange or Lemon Peel for    3
 Teakettle, To Keep from Rusting    3
 Teapot, To Prevent Musty    3
 Tinware Stains or Rust, To Remove or Prevent    11, 14
 Toasting Bread, Cornpopper for    2
 Tomatoes, To Skin Easily    4
 Turkey, To Make Tender    8

 Umbrella Jars, Hint for    24
 Upholstery, Leather, Polish for    19

 Varnished Floors, Polish for    16
 Varnished Wood, To Remove Spots from    34
 Vase, Slender, To Clean    9
 Vases, or Bric-a-Brac, Leaky, To Mend    28
 Vegetables, To Remove Insects When Washing    11
 Velveteen, Two Uses for    28

 Wall Paper, To Make Waterproof    16
 Wall Paper Remover and Cleaner, Recipes for    33
 Walls, Broken, How to Mend    30
 Wash or Lavatory Basins, To Open Clogged    19
 Water, Spilled in Sick Bed, Remedy for    17
 Water, To Soften for Washing and Toilet Purposes    20
 Water Bottles, To Clean    9
 Water Bugs, Kerosene for    1
 Watery Eyes, To Prevent When Peeling Onions    5
 Wax for Floors, A Cheap and Good    23
 Weeds, To Kill    26
 White Curtains, To Make Ecru or Cream Color    21
 White Glove Repair, Emergency    27
 White Kid Articles, To Clean    32
 Window Cleaning Hints (six)    15
 Wood Floors, Cheap Stain for    16
 Woodwork, Greasy, To Clean    34
 Woodwork, White Enameled, To Clean    34
 Woolen Blankets, To Prevent Shrinking    20
 Worms, Earth, in Flower Pots, To Destroy    27
 Wringer Rollers, To Clean    21

 Zinc, How to Clean    31


