



A STUDY OF ASSOCIATION IN INSANITY

BY

GRACE HELEN KENT, A.M.

AND

A.J. ROSANOFF, M.D.

KINGS PARK STATE HOSPITAL, N.Y.



TABLE OF CONTENTS.


PART I. ASSOCIATION IN NORMAL SUBJECTS.

§1. Method of Investigation

§2. The Normal Standard

§3. The Frequency Tables

§4. Normal Associational Tendencies

§5. Practical Considerations

§6. An Empirical Principle of Normal Association


PART II. ASSOCIATION IN INSANE SUBJECTS.

§1. General Survey of Pathological Material


§2. Classification of Reactions

§3. Non-Specific Reactions; Doubtful Reactions

§4. Individual Reactions; Explanation of Groups and Methods of
    Application

      Normal Reactions
      Pathological Reactions
      Derivatives of Stimulus Words
      Partial Dissociation
      Non-Specific Reactions
      Sound Reactions
      Word Complements
      Particles of Speech
      Complete Dissociation
      Perseveration
      Neologisms
      Unclassified Reactions
       Normal Reactions
       Circumstantial Reactions
       Distraction
       Incoherent Reactions

§5. Order of Preference

§6. Errors Involved in the Use of Arbitrary Objective Standards

§7. Analysis of Pathological Material
       Dementia Præcox
       Paranoic Conditions
       Epilepsy
       General Paresis
       Manic-Depressive Insanity
       Involutional Melancholia; Alcoholic Dementia; Senile Dementia

§8. Pathological Reactions from Normal Subjects

§9. Number of Different Words given as Reactions

§10. Co-operation of the Subject

§11. Summary

Acknowledgments

INDEX TO FREQUENCY TABLES AND APPENDIX

THE FREQUENCY TABLES

APPENDIX TO THE FREQUENCY TABLES




PART I.

ASSOCIATION IN NORMAL SUBJECTS.


Among the most striking and commonly observed manifestations of
insanity are certain disorders of the flow of utterance which appear
to be dependent upon a derangement of the psychical processes commonly
termed association of ideas. These disorders have to some extent been
made the subject of psychological experimentation, and the object of
this investigation is to continue and extend the study of these
phenomena by an application of the experimental method known as the
association test.



§ 1. METHOD OF INVESTIGATION.


In this investigation we have followed a modified form of the method
developed by Sommer,[1] the essential feature of which is the
statistical treatment of results obtained by uniform technique from a
large number of cases.

[Footnote 1: Diagnostik der Geisteskrankheiten, p. 112.]

The stimulus consists of a series of one hundred spoken words, to each
of which the subject is directed to react by the first word which it
makes him think of. In the selection of the stimulus words, sixty-six
of which were taken from the list suggested by Sommer, we have taken
care to avoid such words as are especially liable to call up personal
experiences, and have so arranged the words as to separate any two
which bear an obviously close relation to one another. After much
preliminary experimentation we adopted the following list of words:

01 Table
02 Dark
03 Music
04 Sickness
05 Man
06 Deep
07 Soft
08 Eating
09 Mountain
10 House
11 Black
12 Mutton
13 Comfort
14 Hand
15 Short
16 Fruit
17 Butterfly
18 Smooth
19 Command
20 Chair
21 Sweet
22 Whistle
23 Woman
24 Cold
25 Slow
26 Wish
27 River
28 White
29 Beautiful
30 Window
31 Rough
32 Citizen
33 Foot
34 Spider
35 Needle
36 Red
37 Sleep
38 Anger
39 Carpet
40 Girl
41 High
42 Working
43 Sour
44 Earth
45 Trouble
46 Soldier
47 Cabbage
48 Hard
49 Eagle
50 Stomach

No attempt is made to secure uniformity of external conditions for the
test; the aim has been rather to make it so simple as to render
strictly experimental conditions unnecessary. The test may be made in
any room that is reasonably free from distracting influences; the
subject is seated with his back toward the experimenter, so that he
cannot see the record; he is requested to respond to each stimulus
word by one word, the first word that occurs to him other than the
stimulus word itself, and on no account more than one word. If an
untrained subject reacts by a sentence or phrase, a compound word, or
a different grammatical form of the stimulus word, the reaction is
left unrecorded, and the stimulus word is repeated at the close of the
test.

In this investigation no account is taken of the reaction time. The
reasons for this will be explained later.

The general plan has been first to apply the test to normal persons,
so as to derive empirically a normal standard and to determine, if
possible, the nature and limits of normal variation; and then to apply
it to cases of various forms of insanity and to compare the results
with the normal standard, with a view to determining the nature of
pathological variation.



§ 2. THE NORMAL STANDARD.


In order to establish a standard which should fairly represent at
least all the common types of association and which should show the
extent of such variation as might be due to differences in sex,
temperament, education, and environment, we have applied the test to
over one thousand normal subjects.

Among these subjects were persons of both sexes and of ages ranging
from eight years to over eighty years, persons following different
occupations, possessing various degrees of mental capacity and
education, and living in widely separated localities. Many were from
Ireland, and some of these had but recently arrived in this country;
others were from different parts of Europe, but all were able to speak
English with at least fair fluency. Over two hundred of the subjects,
including a few university professors and other highly practiced
observers, were professional men and women or college students. About
five hundred were employed in one or another of the New York State
hospitals for the insane, either as nurses and attendants or as
workers at various trades; the majority of these were persons of
common school education, but the group includes also, on the one hand,
a considerable number of high school graduates; and on the other hand,
a few laborers who were almost or wholly illiterate. Nearly one
hundred and fifty of the subjects were boys and girls of high school
age, pupils of the Ethical Culture School, New York City. The
remaining subjects form a miscellaneous group, consisting largely of
clerks and farmers.



§ 3. THE FREQUENCY TABLES.


From the records obtained from these normal subjects, including in all
100,000 reactions, we have compiled a series of tables, one for each
stimulus word, showing all the different reactions given by one
thousand subjects in response to that stimulus word, and the frequency
with which each reaction has occurred. [1] These tables will be found
at the end of this paper.

[Footnote 1: A similar method of treating associations has been used
by Cattell (Mind, Vol. XII, p. 68; Vol. XIV, p. 230), and more
recently by Reinhold (Zeitschr. f. Psychol., Vol. LIV, p. 183), but
for other purposes.]

With the exception of a few distinctive proper names, which are
indicated by initials, we have followed the plan of introducing each
word into the table exactly as it was found in the record. In the
arrangement of the words in each table, we have placed together all
the derivatives of a single root, regardless of the strict
alphabetical order.[1]

[Footnote 1: It should be mentioned that we have discovered a few
errors in these tables. Some of these were made in compiling them from
the records, and were evidently due to the assistant's difficulty of
reading a strange handwriting. Other errors have been found in the
records themselves. Each of the stimulus words _butter_, _tobacco_ and
_king_ appears from the tables to have been repeated by a subject as a
reaction; such a reaction, had it occurred, would not have been
accepted, and it is plain that the experimenter wrote the stimulus
word in the space where the reaction word should have been written.
Still other errors were due to the experimenter's failure to speak
with sufficient distinctness when reading off the stimulus words;
thus, the reaction _barks_ in response to _dark_ indicates that the
stimulus word was probably understood as _dog_; and the reactions
_blue_ and _color_ in response to _bread_ indicate that the stimulus
word was understood as _red_.]

The total number of different words elicited in response to any
stimulus word is limited, varying from two hundred and eighty words in
response to _anger_ to seventy-two words in response to _needle_.
Furthermore, for the great majority of subjects the limits are still
narrower; to take a striking instance, in response to _dark_ eight
hundred subjects gave one or another of the following seven words:
_light, night, black, color, room, bright, gloomy;_ while only two
hundred gave reactions other than these words; and only seventy
subjects, out of the total number of one thousand, gave reactions
which were not given by any other subject.

If any record obtained by this method be examined by referring to the
frequency tables, the reactions contained in it will fall into two
classes: the _common_ reactions, those which are to be found in
the tables, and the _individual_ reactions, those which are not
to be found in the tables. For the sake of accuracy, any reaction word
which is not found in the table in its identical form, but which is a
grammatical variant of a word found there, may be classed as

_doubtful_.

The value of any reaction may be expressed by the figure representing
the percentage of subjects who gave it. Thus the reaction,
_table--chair_, which was given by two hundred and sixty-seven
out of the total of our one thousand subjects, possesses a value of
26.7 per cent. The significance of this value from the clinical
standpoint will be discussed later.



§ 4. NORMAL ASSOCIATIONAL TENDENCIES


The normal subjects gave, on the average. 6.8 per cent of individual
reactions, 1.5 per cent of doubtful ones, and 91.7 cent of common
ones. The range of variation was rather wide, a considerable number of
subjects giving no individual reactions at all, while a few gave over
30 per cent.[1]

[Footnote 1: In the study of the reactions furnished by our normal
subjects it was possible to analyze the record of any subject only by
removing it from the mass of material which forms our tables, and
using as the standard of comparison the reactions of the remaining 999
subjects.]

In order to determine the influence of age, sex, and education upon
the tendency to give reactions of various values, we have selected
three groups of subjects for special study: (1) one hundred persons of
collegiate or professional education; (2) one hundred persons of
common school education, employed in one of the State hospitals as
attendants, but not as trained nurses; and (3) seventy-eight children
under sixteen years of age. The reactions given by these subjects have
been classified according to frequency of occurrence into seven
groups: (a) individual reactions (value 0); (b) doubtful reactions
(value ±); (c) reactions given by one other person (value 0.1 per
cent); (d) those given by from two to five others (value 0.2--0.5 per
cent); (e) those given by from six to fifteen others (value 0.6-1.5
per cent); (f) those given by from sixteen to one hundred others
(value 1.6--10.0 per cent); and (g) those given by more than one
hundred others (value over 10.0 per cent). The averages obtained from
these groups of subjects are shown in Table 1, and the figures for men
and women are given separately.


TABLE I

Value of reaction           0   ±  0.1 0.2-0.5 0.6-1.5 1.6-10 >10
                Sex  Number %    %   %     %       %       %    %
                    of cases

Persons of        M..  60   9.2 1.8 5.2   9.7    11.0    27.8 85.5
   collegiate     F... 40   9.5 1.8 8.0   9.8    11.7    28.0 83.4
   education      Both 100  9.3 1.8 4.7   8.7    11.8    28.2 34.4
Persons of        M..  50   5.8 1.6 8.6   8.3    10.2    81.6 88.7
   common school  F..  50   4.6 1.8 8.8   7.1     9.4    82.0 42.1
   education      Both 100  5.2 1.4 3.5   7.7     9.8    81.8 40.4
School children   M... 33   5.9 0.8 4.2   8.7    10.0    28.6 88.5
   under 16 Jr.   F..  45   5.0 1.0 4.6   9.8    11.0    80.1 36.7
   years of age   Both 78   5.7 1.4 4.6   9.8    11.2    29.4 87.4
General average.  Both.1000 6.8 1.5


It will be observed that the proportion of individual reactions given
by the subjects of collegiate education is slightly above the general
average for all subjects, while that of each of the other classes is
below the general average. In view, however, of the wide limits of
variation, among the thousand subjects, these deviations from the
general average are no larger than might quite possibly occur by
chance, and the number of cases in each group is so small that the
conclusion that education tends to increase the number of individual
reactions would hardly be justified.

It will be observed also that this comparative study does not show any
considerable differences corresponding to age or sex.

With regard to the type of reaction, it is possible to select groups
of records which present more or less consistently one of the
following special tendencies: (1) the tendency to react by contrasts;
(2) the tendency to react by synonyms or other defining terms; and (3)
the tendency to react by qualifying or specifying terms. How clearly
the selected groups show these tendencies is indicated by Table
II. The majority of records, however, present no such tendency in a
consistent way; nor is there any evidence to show that these
tendencies, when they occur, are to be regarded as manifestations of
permanent mental characteristics, since they might quite possibly be
due to a more or less accidental and transient associational
direction. No further study has as yet been made of these tendencies,
for the reason that they do not appear to possess any pathological
significance.


TABLE II.

                                        Special group values.
                                _____________________________________
 Stimulus   Reaction   General  Contrasting   Defining    Specifying
   word.      word.     value.    group 49    group 73     group 84
                          |       subjects    subjects     subjects
                          |----- %   No.   %   No.   %    No.    %

              chair........... 26.7  25  51.0  11  15.1   10   11.9
1. Table....{ furniture.......  7.5   0   0    13  17.8    4    4.8
              round...........  1.0   1   2.0   0   0      4    4.5
              wood............  7.6   2   4.1   9  12.3   10   11.9

              cotton..........  2.8   0   0     1   1.4    5    6.0
              easy............  3.4   0   0     8  11.0    1    1.2
              feathers........  2.4   0   0     1   1.4    5    6.0
7. Soft.....{ hard............ 36.5  34  69.4  14  19.2   18   21.4
              silk............  1.0   0   0     0   0      2    2.4
              sponge..........  2.2   0   0     0   0      4    4.8

              cloth...........  1.7   1   2.0   0   0      3    3.6
              color........... 12.9   0   0    20  27.4    6    7.1
11. Black...{ dress...........  2.9   1   2.0   1   1.4    9   10.7
              ink.............  1.4   0   0     1   1.4    4    4.8
              white........... 33.9  31  63.3  17  23.3   18   21.4

              desire.......... 19.7   7  14.3  21  28.8   10   11.9
26. Wish....{ longing.........  1.9   1   2.0   6   8.2    2    2.4
              money...........  3.2   0   0     1   1.4    3    3.6

              flowers.........  4.2   0   0     1   1.4    7    8.3
              girl............  2.4   0   0     0   0      5    0.0
29. Beau-     homely..........  2.7   3   6.1   0   0      0    0
     tiful..{ lovely..........  6.4   2   4.1   7   9.6    2    2.4
              pleasing........  1.6   0   0     3   4.1    0    0
              sky.............  1.6   0   0     0   0      3    3.6
              ugly............  6.6  13  26.5   3   4.1    0    0

              court...........  6.4   2   4.1   5   6.8   10   11.9
56. Justice.{ injustice.......  2.6   6  12.2   1   1.4    0    0
              right........... 15.7   3   6.1  20  27.4   13   15.5

              comfort.........  2.6   0   0     5   6.8    1    1.2
              disease.........  0.9   2   4.1   0   0      1    1.2
59. Health..{ good............  9.4   2   4.1   8  11.0   18   21.4
              sickness........ 15.3  23  46.9   6   8.2    1    1.2
              strength........ 11.2   2   4.1  12  16.4    4    4.8

              arrow...........  1.3   0   0     0   0      2    2.4
              fast............ 22.2   0   0    25  34.2   15   17.9
              horse...........  2.8   1   2.0   1   1.4    6    7.1
65. Swift...{ quick........... 11.7   1   2.0  22  30.1    2    2.4
              run.............  1.9   0   0     0   0      4    4.8
              runner..........  1.3   0   0     0   0      1    1.2
              slow............ 19.0  30  61.2   2   2.7    4    4.8
              speed...........  2.9   1   2.0   5   6.8    0    0

              disagreeable....  1.0   0   0     2   2.7    0    0
              distasteful.....  1.0   0   0     4   5.5    0    0
              gall............  4.2   0   0     2   2.7    8    9.5
76. Bitter..{ medicine........  3.7   0   0     0   0      3    3.6
              quinine.........  2.3   0   0     0   0      6    7.1
              sweet........... 30.5  31  63.3   8  11.0   12   14.3
              taste...........  6.6   1   2.0  17  23.3    3    3.6

              bread........... 20.6  17  34.7   4   5.5   18   21.4


              eatable.........  1.2   0   0     9  12.3    0    0
81. Butter..{ food............  6.3   1   2.0  14  19.2    3    3.6
              sweet...........  1.2   0   0     0   0      3    3.6
              yellow..........  8.0   0   0     0   0     18   21.4

              gladness........  4.4   0   0     7   9.6    1    1.2
              grief...........  1.8   4   8.2   0   0      0    0
86. Joy.....{ pleasure........ 12.1   1   2.0  13  17.8    7    8.3
              sadness.........  1.3   2   4.1   0   0      0    0
              sorrow.......... 13.5  23  46.9   2   2.7    2    2.4



§ 5. PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS.


This method is so simple that it requires but little training on the
part of the experimenter, and but little co-operation on the part of
the subject. It is not to be assumed that every reaction obtained by
it is a true and immediate association to the corresponding stimulus
word; but we have found it sufficient for the purpose of the test if
the subject can be induced to give, in response to each stimulus word,
any one word other than the stimulus word itself. No attempt is made
to determine the exact degree of co-operation in any case.

In the early stages of this investigation the reaction time was
regularly recorded. The results showed remarkable variations, among
both normal and insane subjects. In a series of twenty-five tests,
made more recently upon normal subjects, ninety reactions occupied
more than ten seconds, and fifty-four of the stimulus words elicited a
ten-second response from at least one subject.[1]

[Footnote 1: These tests were made by Dr. F. Lyman Wells, of the
McLean Hospital, Waverley, Mass., and he has kindly furnished these
data.]

It is noteworthy that these extremely long intervals occur in
connection with reactions of widely differing values. That they are by
no means limited to individual reactions is shown in Table III. by a
group of selected reactions, all given by normal subjects.


TABLE III.

Word combination   Reaction time    Value of
                    in seconds.     reaction.
comfort--happiness       20            5.0%
short--long              11           27.9%
smooth--plane            16            2.3%
woman--lady              40            4.1%
hard--iron               12            2.4%
justice--judge           20            9.1%
memory--thought          20            8.1%
joy--pleasure            18           12.1%


It is apparent, even from a superficial examination of the material,
that the factors which cause variations of reaction time, both in the
normal state and in pathological states, are numerous and complex.

It has been the purpose of this study to establish as far as possible
strictly objective criteria for distinguishing normal from abnormal
associations, and for this reason we have made no attempt to determine
by means of introspection the causes of variations of reaction time.

It would seem that the importance and magnitude of the problem of
association time are such as to demand not merely a crude measurement
of the gross reaction time in a large number of cases, but rather a
special investigation by such exact methods as have been used by
Cattell [1] and others in the analysis of the complex reaction. It
would be impracticable for us to employ such methods in a study so
extensive as this.

[Footnote 1: Mind, Vol. XI, 1886.]

In view of these considerations we discontinued the recording of the
reaction time.

If the association test is to be useful in the study of pathological
conditions, it is of great importance to have a reliable measure of
the associational value of a pair of ideas. Many attempts have been
made to modify and amplify the classical grouping of associations
according to similarity, contrast, contiguity, and sequence, so as to
make it serviceable in differentiating between normal and abnormal
associations.

In this study we attempted to apply Aschaffenburg's [1] classification
of reactions, but without success. Our failure to utilize this system
of classification is assigned to the following considerations: (1)
Distinctions between associations according to logical relations are
extremely difficult to define; in many cases there is room for
difference of opinion as to the proper place for an association, and
thus the application of a logical scheme depends largely upon the
personal equation of the observer; that even experienced observers
cannot, in all cases, agree in placing an association is shown by
Aschaffenburg's criticisms of the opinions of other observers on this
point.[2] (2) Logical distinctions do not bring out clearly the
differences between the reactions of normal subjects and those of
insane subjects; logically, the reaction _bath--ink_, which was given
by a patient, might be placed in the class with the reaction
_bath--water_, although there is an obvious difference between the two
reactions. (3) Many of the reactions given by insane subjects possess
no obvious logical value whatever; but since any combination of ideas
may represent a relationship, either real or imagined, it would be
arbitrary to characterize such a reaction as incoherent.

[Footnote 1: Experimentelle Studien uber Association. Psychologische
Arbeiten, Vol. I, p. 209; Vol. II, p. 1; Vol. IV, p. 235.]

[Footnote 2: Loc. cit, Vol. 1, pp. 226-227.]

The criterion of values which is used in this study is an empirical
one. As has already been explained (p. 8), every word contained in the
frequency tables possesses a value of at least 0.1 per cent, and other
words have a zero value. With the aid of our method the difficulty of
classifying the reactions quoted above is obviated, as it is necessary
only to refer to the table to find their proper values: the value of
the reaction _bath--water_ is 33.9 per cent, while that of the
reaction _bath--ink_ is 0.

Logically the combination _health--wealth_ may be placed in any
one of four classes, as follows:


                  / intrinsic / causal dependence
  health--wealth /            \ coordination
                 \
                  \ extrinsic / speech reminiscence
                              \ sound similarity


But since our table shows this association to have an empirical value
of 7.6 per cent, it becomes immaterial which of its logical relations
is to be considered the strongest. It is mainly important, from our
point of view, to separate reactions possessing an empirical value
from those whose value is zero.



§ 6. AN EMPIRICAL PRINCIPLE OF NORMAL ASSOCIATION.


On a general survey of the whole mass of material which forms the
basis of the first part of this study, we are led to observe that
_the one tendency which appears to be almost universal among normal
persons is the tendency to give in response to any stimulus word one
or another of a small group of common reactions_.

It appears from the pathological material now on hand that this
tendency is greatly weakened in some cases of mental disease. Many
patients have given more than 50 per cent of individual reactions.

It should be mentioned that occasionally a presumably normal subject
has given a record very similar to those obtained from patients, in
respect to both the number and the nature of the individual reactions.
A few subjects who gave peculiar reactions were known to possess
significant eccentricities, and for this reason we excluded their
records from the thousand records which furnished the basis for the
frequency tables; we excluded also a few peculiar records obtained
from subjects of whom nothing was known, on the ground that such
records would serve only to make the tables more cumbersome, without
adding anything to their practical value. The total number of records
thus excluded was seventeen.

It will be apparent to anyone who examines the frequency tables that
the reactions obtained from one thousand persons fall short of
exhausting the normal associational possibilities of these stimulus
words. The tables, however, have been found to be sufficiently
inclusive for the practical purpose which they were intended to
serve. Common reactions, whether given by a sane or an insane subject,
may, in the vast majority of instances, safely be regarded as
normal. As to individual reactions, they cannot all be regarded as
abnormal, but they include nearly all those reactions which are worthy
of special analysis in view of their possible pathological
significance. What can be said further of individual reactions,
whether normal or abnormal, will appear in the second part of this
contribution.




PART II.

ASSOCIATION IN INSANE SUBJECTS.



§ 1. GENERAL SURVEY OF PATHOLOGICAL MATERIAL.


The pathological material which forms the basis of the present part of
our study consists mainly of two hundred and forty-seven test records
obtained for the most part from patients at the Kings Park State
Hospital.

The different groups from which the cases were selected, together with
the number from each group, are shown in Table I.


TABLE I.

Dementia præcox                     108 cases.
Paranoic conditions                  33   "
Epilepsy                             24   "
General Paresis                      32   "
Manic-depressive insanity            32   "
Involuntary melancholia               8   "
Alcoholic psychoses                   6   "
Senile dementia                       4   "


A comparison of our pathological with our normal material _en
masse_ reveals in the former evidence of a weakening of the normal
tendency to respond by common reactions. This is shown in Table II.


TABLE II.

                        Common     Doubtful     Individual
                       reactions.  reactions.   reactions.
1,000 normal subject     91.7%        1.5%         6.8%

247 insane subjects      70.7%        2.5%        26.8%


It seems evident from this that pathological significance attaches
mainly to individual reactions, so that our study resolves itself
largely into (1) an analysis and classification of individual
reactions and (2) an attempt to determine what relationship, if any,
exists between the different types of reactions and the different
clinical forms of mental disease.



§ 2. CLASSIFICATION OF REACTIONS.


Those who have attempted to use the association test in the study of
insanity have felt the need of a practical classification of
reactions, and have at the same time encountered the difficulty of
establishing definite criteria for distinguishing the different groups
from one another. It is a comparatively simple matter to make these
distinctions in a general way and even to formulate a more or less
comprehensive theoretical classification, but there still remains much
difficulty in practice. We have made repeated attempts to utilize
various systems of classification which involve free play of personal
equation in their application. Although for us the matter is greatly
simplified by the elimination of all the common reactions with the aid
of the frequency tables, we have nevertheless met with no success. The
distinctions made by either of us have on no occasion fully satisfied,
at the second reading, either the one who made them or the other,
while a comparison of the distinctions made by each of us
independently has shown a disagreement to the extent of 20-35 per
cent.

We sought, therefore, to formulate a classification in which the
various groups should be so defined as to obviate the interference of
personal equation in the work of applying it, hoping thus to achieve
greater accuracy. In this we can lay claim to only partial success;
for, in the first place, having satisfactorily defined a number of
groups, we found it necessary in the end to provide a special group
for unclassified reactions, into which falls more than one-third of
the total number of individual reactions; and, in the second place, in
at least two of our groups the play of personal equation has not been
entirely eliminated, so that there is still a possibility of error to
the extent of five per cent of individual reactions, which means
approximately one per cent of the total number of reactions. We have
found, however, that in spite of these shortcomings the classification
here proposed is more serviceable than others which, though more
comprehensive, are at the same time lacking in definiteness.

Our classification consists of the following classes, groups and
subdivisions:

I. _Common reactions._
  1. Specific reactions.
  2. Non-specific reactions.

II. _Doubtful reactions._

III. _Individual reactions._
  1. Normal reactions.
  2. Pathological reactions:
    A. Derivatives of stimulus words.
    B. Partial dissociation:
      (a) Non-specific reactions.
      (b) Sound reactions:
        a. Words.
        b. Neologisms.
      (c) Word complements.
      (d) Particles of speech.
    C. Complete dissociation:
      (a) Perseveration:
        a. Association to preceding stimulus.
        b. Association to preceding reaction.
        c. Repetition of preceding stimulus.
        d. Repetition of previous stimulus.
        e. Repetition of preceding reaction.
        f. Repetition of previous reaction.
        g. Reaction repeated five times (stereotypy).
      (b) Neologisms without sound relation.
  3. Unclassified.



§ 3. NON-SPECIFIC REACTIONS; DOUBTFUL REACTIONS.


*Non-specific Reactions.*--It has already been intimated that common
reactions are in the vast majority of instances to be regarded as
normal. From amongst them, however, a fairly definite group can be
separated out which seems to possess some pathological significance,
namely, the group which we have termed non-specific.

In this group are placed words which are so widely applicable as to
serve as more or less appropriate reactions to almost any of our
stimulus words. That such reactions are in value inferior to the
remaining group of common reactions, which we have termed, in
contradistinction, _specific reactions_, is perhaps sufficiently
obvious; we shall speak later, however, of their occurrence in both
normal and insane cases.

It is not always easy to judge whether or not a given reaction should
be classed as non-specific. A study of our material made with special
reference to this type of reactions has enabled us to select the
following list of words, any of which, occurring in response to any
stimulus word, is classed as a non-specific reaction:

article, articles
bad
beautiful, beauty
fine
good, goodness
great
happiness, happy
large
man
necessary, necessity
nice

object (noun)
people
person
pleasant, pleasantness, pleasing, pleasure
pretty
small
thinking, thought, thoughts
unnecessary
unpleasant
use, used, useful, usefulness, useless, uselessness, uses, using
woman
work

It should be mentioned that some of these words occur as reactions to
one or several stimulus words with such frequency
(_citizen--man_, value 27.8 per cent; _health--good_, value
9.4 per cent) as to acquire in such instances a value as high as that
of strictly specific reactions.

*Doubtful Reactions* have already been defined (p.40): any
reaction word which is not found in the table in its identical form,
but which is a grammatical variant or derivative of a word found
there, is placed in this group.



§ 4. INDIVIDUAL REACTIONS; EXPLANATION OF GROUPS AND METHODS OF
APPLICATION.


*Normal Reactions.*--Inasmuch as the frequency tables do not exhaust all
normal possibilities of reaction, a certain number of reactions which
are essentially normal are to be found among the individual reactions.
In order to separate these from the pathological reactions, we have
compiled an appendix to the frequency tables, consisting mainly of
specific definitions of groups of words to be included under each
stimulus word in our list. This appendix will be found at the end of
this paper.

A word of explanation is perhaps due as to the manner in which the
appendix has been compiled. It was developed in a purely empirical
way, the basis being such individual reactions, given by both normal
and insane subjects, as seemed in our judgment to be obviously normal.

It must be acknowledged that the appendix falls short of all that
might be desired. In the first place, its use involves to some slight
extent the play of personal equation, and it therefore constitutes a
source of error; in the second place, it is in some respects too
inclusive while in other respects it is not sufficiently so. However,
the error due to personal equation is slight; the inclusion of certain
"far-fetched" or even frankly pathological reactions may be discounted
by bearing in mind that the general value of this group is not equal
to that of the group of common reactions; and the number of strictly
normal reactions which are not included is after all small. Our
experience has shown us that the appendix constitutes an important aid
in the analysis of individual reactions.

*Pathological Reactions. Derivatives of Stimulus Words.*--We
place here any reaction which is a grammatical variant or derivative
of a stimulus word. The tendency to give such reactions seems to be
dependent upon a suspension or inhibition of the normal process by
which the stimulus word excites the production of a new concept, for
we have here not a production of a new concept but a mere change in
the form of the stimulus word. As examples of such reactions may be
mentioned: _eating--eatables_, _short--shortness_,
_sweet--sweetened_, _quiet--quietness_.

*Partial Dissociation.*--We have employed the term dissociation
to indicate a rupture of that bond--whatever be its nature-which may
be supposed to exist normally between stimulus and reaction and which
causes normal persons to respond in the majority of instances by
common reactions. And we speak of partial dissociation where there is
still an obvious, though weak and superficial, connection. Under this
heading we can differentiate four types:

*Non-specific Reactions* have already been defined; we
distinguish those in this class from those in the class of common
reactions by means of the frequency tables.

*Sound Reactions.*--This type requires no explanation; the main
difficulty is to decide what degree of sound similarity between
stimulus and reaction should be deemed sufficient for placing a
reaction under this heading. The total number of different sounds
used in language articulation is, of course, small, so that any two
words are liable to present considerable chance similarity. Some
time ago we estimated the average degree of sound similarity between
stimulus words and reaction words in a series of one hundred
test records obtained from normal persons; we found that on
the average 14.53 per cent of the sounds of the stimulus words
were reproduced, in the same order, in the reaction word. Our
experience finally led us to adopt the following general rule: A
reaction is to be placed under this heading when fifty per cent of
the sounds of the shorter word of the pair are identical with sounds
of the longer word and are ranged in the same order.

Among sound reactions we occasionally find *neologisms*; for these a
separate heading is provided. Possibly their occurrence may be taken
as an indication of an exaggerated tendency to respond by sound
reactions.

*Word Compliments.*--Here we include any reaction which, added to the
stimulus word, forms a word, a proper name, or a compound word in
common use.

*Particles of Speech.*--Under this heading we include articles,
numerals, pronouns, auxiliary verbs, adverbs of time, place and
degree, conjunctions, prepositions, and interjections.

*Complete Dissociation.*--Here are included reactions which
appear to be entirely unrelated to the corresponding stimulus words;
in the case of such reactions the stimulus words seem to act, as
Aschaffenburg has pointed out, merely as signals for discharge. This
subdivision contains several types of reactions which seem to be
dependent upon the phenomenon of perseveration; it contains also the
rather important type of neologisms.

The phenomenon of *preservation* occurs in cases in which one may
observe an abnormal immobility of attention. To react normally to a
series of stimulus words requires on the part of the subject, in the
first place, a certain alertness in order that he may grasp quickly
and clearly the meaning of each word, and, in the second place, a
prompt shifting of the mind from one reaction to the next. When such
mental mobility is lacking the subject is liable to react not by a
response adjusted to the stimulus word, but either by repeating a
previous stimulus or reaction, or by giving a word associated to the
preceding stimulus or reaction.

The names of the different types of reactions included under the
heading of perseveration are sufficiently descriptive; we shall here
refer only to those which require further definition.

*Association to Preceding Stimulus.*--Here is placed any reaction
that is shown by the frequency tables to be related to the stimulus
preceding the one in question. Seeming or even obvious relationship,
if not established by reference to the frequency tables, is
disregarded. In the tables, however, the combination may not exist in
direct order but only in reverse order, in which case the reaction is
included here. The following examples may serve as illustrations:

_thief--night_
_lion--pocket-book_

_Lion--pocket-book_ is not found in the frequency tables, and is,
therefore, an individual reaction; _thief--pocket-book_, however,
is found there; _pocket-book_ is, therefore, classed in this case
as an association to preceding stimulus.

_table--fork_
_dark--mutton_

_Dark--mutton_ is not found in the frequency tables;
_table--mutton_ is also not found there in the direct order, but
is found in the reverse order, viz.: _mutton--table; mutton_ is,
therefore, classed in this case as an association to preceding
stimulus.

*Association to Preceding Reaction.*--If either the reaction in
question or the preceding reaction happens to be one of the stimulus
words in our list, and a relationship between the two be found to
exist by reference to the frequency tables--whether in direct or in
reverse order--the reaction in question is classed as an association
to preceding reaction. This is illustrated by the following examples:

_eating--table_
_mountain--floor_

_Mountain--floor_ is an individual reaction; _table--floor_

is found in the frequency tables; _floor_ is, therefore, classed
as an association to preceding reaction.

_beautiful--flowers_
_window--red_

_Window--red_ is an individual reaction; _red--flowers_ is
found in the frequency tables; therefore, _red_ is classed as an
association to preceding reaction.

In cases in which neither the reaction in question nor the preceding
reaction happens to be one of our stimulus words, but a relationship
between them may be judged to exist without considerable doubt, the
reaction in question is also classed here. Example:

_priest--father_
_ocean--mother_

_Ocean--mother_ is an individual reaction; neither the word
_father_ nor the word _mother_ is among our stimulus words;
but the association between the words _father_ and _mother_
may be judged to exist without considerable doubt; therefore, in this
case _mother_ is classed as an association to preceding reaction.

In such cases as this personal equation must necessarily come into
play; comparative uniformity of judgment may, however, be attained by
systematically excluding any reaction the relationship of which to the
preceding reaction is subject to any considerable doubt and by placing
any such reaction in the unclassified group.

*Repetition of Previous Stimulus.*--Here we place any reaction
which is a repetition of any previous stimulus from amongst the ten
next preceding, at the same time placing *repetition of preceding
stimulus* under a separate heading.

*Neologisms.*--Here we place the newly coined words, so commonly
given by the insane, excepting such as possess a sound relationship to
the stimulus word, for which, as already stated, a special place in
the classification has been provided.

Neologisms might be divided into three types, as follows: (1) those
which arise from ignorance of language (_comfort--uncomfort,
short--diminiature_); (2) distortions of actual words, apparently
of pathological origin and not due to ignorance (_hungry--foodation,
thief--dissteal_); and (3) those which seem to be without any
meaning whatever (_scack, gehimper, hanrow, dicut_). It is,
however, impossible to draw clear-cut distinctions between these
types, and for this reason we have made no provision in our
classification for such division.

*Unclassified Reactions.*--This group is important, in the first
place, because it is numerically a large one, and in the second place,
because it contains certain fairly definite types of reactions which
are placed here for the sole reason that we have not been able to find
strictly objective criteria for their differentiation from other
types.

It has already been stated that the frequency tables, even together
with the appendix, fail to exhaust all normal possibilities of
association, so that a certain small number of perfectly normal
reactions must fall into the unclassified group. We submit the
following examples:

_music--listen_
_smooth--suave_
_sour--curdled_
_earth--mound_

Another type of reactions found in the unclassified group, though also
normal, yet not obviously so until explained by the subject, is
represented by those which originate from purely personal experiences,
such as the following, given by normal subjects:

_blossom--T....._
_hammer--J....._

The first of these reactions is explained by the subject's acquaintance
with a young lady, Miss T...., who has been nick-named "Blossom," and
the second is explained by the subject's having among her pupils at
school a boy by the name of J.... Hammer.

It would be difficult to estimate the proportion of such reactions in
the unclassified group, but we have gained the general impression that
it is small. An attempt to place them in a separate group could be
made only with the aid of explanations from the subjects; such aid in
the case of insane subjects is generally unreliable. Moreover, to
class these reactions as strictly normal would perhaps be going too
far, since their general value is obviously inferior to that of the
common reactions; and in any case in which they are given in unusually
large numbers they must be regarded as manifestation of a tendency to
depart from the normal to the extent to which they displace common
reactions. The next type of reactions met with in the unclassified
group is characterized by a peculiarly superficial, or non-essential,
or purely _circumstantial_ relationship to the stimulus. Such
reactions, though occasionally given by normal subjects, are more
often given by insane ones, and seem to be somewhat characteristic of
states of mental deterioration which are clinically rather loosely
described as puerilism. We offer the following examples, given by
normal subjects:

_music--town_
_sickness--summer_
_child--unknown_
_house--enter_

Still another type of reactions to be considered in this connection
consists of words which are in no way related to the corresponding
stimulus words, but which arise from _distraction_ of the subject
by surrounding objects, sounds, and the like. In some cases the
experimenter may be able to judge from the direction of the subject's
gaze, from a listening attitude, and so on, that certain reactions are
due to distraction. In other cases, particularly in cases of normal
subjects, the fact that certain reactions are due to distraction may
be determined by questioning the subject on this point immediately
after making the test; In work with insane subjects, as we have
several times had occasion to point out, such aid is generally not
available.

The group of unclassified reactions includes also one more type of
reactions which are of great importance both numerically and
otherwise. These are the *incoherent reactions*, that is to say,
reactions which are determined neither by the stimulus words, nor by
the agency of perseveration, nor by distraction.

Although the occurrence of incoherent reactions is hardly subject to
doubt, yet in no instance is it possible to establish with certainty
that a given reaction is of this type, for in no instance can a
remote, or an imagined, or a merely symbolic relationship between
stimulus and reaction be positively excluded. Some, indeed, would
assert that some such relationship must necessarily exist in every
instance, at least in the domain of the subconscious. This
circumstance necessitates the placing of this type of reactions in the
unclassified group.

In practice it may be found advisable in some cases to analyze the
unclassified reactions with a view to ascertaining to what extent each
of the various types is represented among them. But one here treads on
slippery ground, and one must be continually warned against the danger
of erroneous conclusions.



§ 5. ORDER OF PREFERENCE.


After having developed the classification here proposed we found that
there was still considerable room for difference of opinion in the
placing of many reactions, owing to the circumstance that in many
cases a reaction presents features which render it assignable under
any one of two or more headings. To leave the matter of preference in
grouping: to be decided in each case according to the best judgment of
the experimenter would mean introducing again the play of personal
equation, and would thus court failure of all our efforts to
accomplish a standardization of the association test. Therefore, the
necessity of establishing a proper order of preference for guidance in
the application of the classification became to us quite apparent.

In the arrangement of the order of preference we were guided mainly by
two principles, namely: (i) as between two groups of unequal
definition, the one which is more clearly defined and which,
therefore, leaves less play for personal equation is to be preferred;
(2) as between two groups of equal definition, the one which possesses
the greater pathological significance is to be preferred. In
accordance with these principles we have adopted the order of
preference shown in Table III., placing every reaction under the
highest heading on the list under which it may be properly classed.


TABLE III

1. Non-specific (common).
2. Doubtful reactions.
            INDIVIDUAL REACTIONS.
3. Sound reactions (neologisms).
4. Neologisms without sound relation.
5. Repetition of preceding reaction.
6. Reaction repeated five times.
7. Repetition of preceding stimulus.
8. Derivatives.
9. Non-specific reactions.
10. Sound reactions (words).
11. Word complements.
12. Particles of speech.
13. Association to preceding stimulus.
14. Association to preceding reaction (by frequency tables).
15. Repetition of previous reaction.
16. Repetition of previous stimulus.
17. Normal (by appendix).
18. Association to preceding reaction (without frequency tables).
19. Unclassified.



§ 6. ERRORS INVOLVED IN THE USE OF ARBITRARY OBJECTIVE STANDARDS.


It may readily be seen that such definiteness and uniformity as this
classification possesses results from the introduction of more or less
arbitrary criteria for the differentiation of the various types of
reactions. The question might arise, To what extent do the
distinctions thus made correspond to reality? To consider, for
instance, our rule for the placing of sound reactions (50 per cent of
the sounds of the shorter word to be present, in the same order, in
the other word): when a given reaction (_man--minstrel_) is in
accordance with the rule assigned under the heading of sound
reactions, can it be assumed that sound similarity and not some other
relationship is the determining factor of the association in question?
Or when in, a given instance (_cabbage--cobweb_) the sound
similarity falls somewhat short of the standard required by the rule,
can it be assumed that sound similarity is not, after all, the
determining factor?

Similar questions may, of course, arise in connection with other
subdivisions.

It must, indeed, be conceded that objective methods can reveal but
indirectly and with uncertainty the inner mechanism which produces any
association and that in any given instance it would be impossible to
establish the correctness of grouping in accordance with such

methods. However, to decide that question for any given reaction is
really not necessary in practice, since an error made through wrongly
placing one, two, or three reactions tinder any heading is of no
significance; the types acquire importance only when represented by
large numbers in a record under consideration; and when many reactions
fall tinder a single heading the likelihood of error, as affecting the
record as a whole, is by that fact alone greatly reduced.

The whole question might more profitably be approached from another
point of view: To what extent are the distinctions of this
classification useful? An answer to this question can be found only in
the results.



§ 7. ANALYSIS OF PATHOLOGICAL MATERIAL


We present in Table IV, the results of a statistical examination of
the records obtained from certain groups of normal subjects and from
some groups of insane subjects.

The normal groups have been studied for the purpose of determining the
frequency and manner of occurrence among normal subjects of the
various of abnormal reactions. It seemed best for this purpose to
consider separately the records of those subjects who gave an
unusually large number of individual reactions. Fifty-three records
containing fifteen or more individual reactions were found after a
fairly diligent search among our normal test records. In the other
groups of subjects--persons of common school education, persons of
collegiate education, and children--we included no records containing
more than ten individual reactions.

The more striking departures from average normal figures are indicated
in the table by the use of heavy type.

This table reveals associational tendencies as occurring in connection
with the psychoses studied. A better insight into the nature of these
tendencies can be gained by a special analysis of the test of each
clinical group.


DEMENTIA PRÆCOX

In this psychosis we find the number of individual reactions far
exceeding not only that of the normal but that of any other psychosis
which we studied. To a corresponding extent we find the number of the
highest type of normal reactions--the common specific
reactions--reduced.


TABLE IV.

TYPES OF REACTION
                                      A   B    C   D   E    F   G   H    I   J   K    L   M    N    O   P   Q    R   S   T    U   V    W    X   Y    Z   AA
                                    +--+----+----+--+----+----+--+----+----+--+----+----+---+----+----+--+----+----+--+----+----+---+----+----+---+----+----+
_Common reactions:_                 |  |    |    |  |    |    |  |    |    |  |    |    |   |    |    |  |    |    |  |    |    |   |    |    |   |    |    |
  Specific reactions................|90|89.8|....|90|89.7|....|91|89.4|....|72|71.4|....|631/2|58.9|....|82|71.3|....|71|63.7|....|78 |71.8|....|80 |71.2|....|
  Non-specific reactions............| 4| 4.9|....| 4| 4.1|....| 5| 5.7|....| 3| 4.8|....| 3 | 4.2|....| 4| 4.8|....| 5| 6.0|....|41/2 | 5.3|....|31/2 | 4.6|....|
                                    |  |    |    |  |    |    |  |    |    |  |    |    |   |    |    |  |    |    |  |    |    |   |    |    |   |    |    |
_Doubtful reactions_................| 1| 1.1|....| 1| 0.6|....| 0| 0.7|....| 2| 2.3|....| 2 | 2.5|....| 2| 3.0|....| 3| 3.0|....| 2 | 2.2|....| 2 | 3.0|....|
                                    |  |    |    |  |    |    |  |    |    |  |    |    |   |    |    |  |    |    |  |    |    |   |    |    |   |    |    |
_Individual reactions:_             |  |    |    |  |    |    |  |    |    |  |    |    |   |    |    |  |    |    |  |    |    |   |    |    |   |    |    |
  Normal reactions..................| 2| 1.8|41.8| 1| 1.8|35.8| 1| 1.6|42.0| 7| 7.3|33.4| 4 | 4.8|13.9| 3| 3.5|16.3|31/2| 3.4|12.6| 3 | 3.6|17.4|41/2 | 5.3|24.3|
  Derivatives of stimulus words.....| 0|0.01| 0.3| 0|0.02| 0.3| 0|   0|  0 | 0|0.04| 0.2| 0 |0.16|0.46| 0|0.10|0.40| 0|0.04|0.15| 0 |0.09|0.45| 0 |0.09|0.43|
  Non-specific Reactions............| 0| 0.1| 3.3| 0|0.1 | 1.2| 0|0.2 | 5.3| 0|0.4 | 2.0| 0 |0.6 |1.7 | 0|0.4 |1.7 | 0|0.5 |1.8 | 1 |0.5 |2.4 | 0 |0.3 |1.6 |
  Sound reactions (words)...........| 0|0.08| 1.9| 0|0.05| 0.9| 0|  0 |  0 | 0|0.11| 0.5| 0 |1.62|4.7 | 1|1.60|7.4 | 0|0.54|2.0 | 0 |0.22|1.0 | 1 |1.53|7.1 |
  Sound reactions (neologisms)......| 0|0.01| 0.3| 0|0.02| 0.3| 0|  0 |  0 | 0|  0 |  0 | 0 |0.07|0.2 | 0|1.0 |4.7 | 0|0.17|0.6 | 0 |0.06|0.3 | 0 |0.03|0.1 |
  Word complements..................| 0|0.01| 0.3| 0|0.03| 0.6| 0|  0 |  0 | 0|0.08| 0.3| 0 |0.06|0.2 | 0|0.03|0.1 | 0|  0 |  0 | 0 |0.06|0.3 | 0 |0.10|0.9 |
  Particles of speech...............| 0|0.09| 2.2| 0|0.06| 1.2| 0|0.06| 1.6| 0|0.68| 3.1| 0 |1.06|3.1 | 0|0.50|2.2 | 0|1.53|5.3 | 0 |1.22|5.3 | 0 |1.32|6.1 |
  Association to preceding stimulus.| 0|0.06| 1.4| 0|0.06| 1.2| 0|0.04| 1.1| 0|0.49| 2.2| 0 |0.92|2.7 | 0|0.60|2.7 | 1|1.04|3.8 | 0 |0.75|3.6 | 0 |0.53|2.5 |
  Association to preceding reaction.| 0|  0 |  0 | 0|  0 |  0 | 0|0.04| 1.0| 0|0.09| 0.4| 1 |1.29|3.8 | 0|0.40|2.0 | 1|2.50|9.2 | 1 |3.69|17.7| 0 |0.37|1.7 |
  Repetition of preceding stimulus..| 0|  0 |  0 | 0|0.03| 0.6| 0|  0 |  0 | 0|  0 |  0 | 0 |0.06|0.2 | 0|  0 |  0 | 0|0.08|0.3 | 0 |  0 |  0 | 0 |  0 |  0 |
  Repetition of previous stimulus...| 0|  0 |  0 | 0|0.01| 0.3| 0|  0 |  0 | 0|0.02| 0.1| 0 |0.12|0.4 | 0|0.10|0.4 | 0|0.29|1.1 | 0 |0.28|1.4 | 0 |0.22|1.0 |
  Repetition of preceding reaction..| 0|  0 |  0 | 0|0.03| 0.6| 0|0.02| 0.5| 0|0.08| 0.3| 0 |1.16|3.4 | 0|0.12|0.6 | 0|0.58|2.1 | 0 |2.28|10.9| 0 |0.73|3.6 |
  Repetition of previous reaction...| 0|0.21| 4.7| 0|0.31| 6.3| 0|0.23| 5.8| 0|0.92| 4.2| 1 |2.72|7.9 | 1|1.51|7.1 | 3|3.46|12.7| 0 |0.87|4.2 | 0 |0.91|4.2 |
  Reaction repeated five times......| 0|  0 |  0 | 0|0.05| 0.9| 0|0.08| 2.1| 0|0.32| 1.5| 0 |1.52|4.4 | 0|1.21|5.5 | 0|4.58|16.8| 0 |1.28|6.1 | 0 |0.81|3.8 |
  Neologisms without sound relation.| 0|  0 |  0 | 0|  0 |  0 | 0|0.02| 0.5| 0|  0 |  0 | 0 |1.90|5.5 | 0|0.81|3.7 | 0|0.58|2.1 | 0 |0.09|0.4 | 0 |0.31|1.5 |
  Unclassified......................| 2| 1.8|43.4| 2|2.5 |50.3| 1|1.5 |39.4|11|11.1|51.2|11 |16.2|47.2| 5|9.3 |43.5| 6|7.7 |28.5| 5 |5.9 |28.4| 4 |8.6 |40.1|
                                    +--+----+----+--+----+----+--+----+----+--+----+----+---+----+----+--+----+----+--+----+----+---+----+----+---+----+----+
    Total individual reactions      | 4| 4.2|....| 5|5.1 |....| 9|3.9 |....|21|21.8|....|261/2|34.3|....|10|21.3|....|19|27.2|....|141/2|20.8|....|111/2|21.5|....|
                                    +--+----+----+--+----+----+--+----+----+--+----+----+---+----+----+--+----+----+--+----+----+---+----+----+---+----+----+

86 normal subjects, common school education; records containing not
over 10 individual reactions.

  A. Median per cent of all reactions.
  B. Average per cent of all reactions.
  C. Average per cent of individual reactions.

66 normal subjects, collegiate education; records containing not over
10 individual reactions.

  D. Median per cent of all reactions.
  E. Average per cent of all reactions.
  F. Average per cent of individual reactions.

46 normal subjects, school children; records containing not over 10
individual reactions.

  G. Median per cent of all reactions.
  H. Average per cent of all reactions.
  I. Average per cent of individual reactions.

53 normal subjects; records containing not under 15 individual
reactions.

  J. Median per cent of all reactions.
  K. Average per cent of all reactions.
  L. Average per cent of individual reactions.

108 cases of dementia præcox.

  M. Median per cent of all reactions.
  N. Average per cent of all reactions.
  O. Average per cent of individual reactions.

33 cases of paranoic conditions.

  P. Median per cent of all reactions.
  Q. Average per cent of all reactions.
  R. Average per cent of individual reactions.

24 cases of epilepsy.

  S. Median per cent of all reactions.
  T. Average per cent of all reactions.
  U. Average per cent of individual reactions.

32 cases of general paresis.

  V. Median per cent of all reactions.
  W. Average per cent of all reactions.
  X. Average per cent of individual reactions.

32 cases of manic-depressive insanity.

  Y. Median per cent of all reactions.
  Z. Average per cent of all reactions.
  AA. Average per cent of individual reactions.


While almost every type of individual reactions shows here an increase
over the normal averages, the most striking increases are shown by the
table to be in the groups of unclassified reactions, neologisms, sound
reactions, and some types of perseveration. A further examination of
the individual test records shows that there is no uniformity of
associational tendencies in this clinical group, but that several
tendencies are more or less frequently met with either alone or in
various combinations. Yet some of these tendencies, when appearing at
all prominently, are so highly characteristic of dementia præcox as to
be almost pathognomonic. Among these may be mentioned: (1) the
tendency to give _neologisms_, particularly those of the
senseless type; (2) the tendency to give unclassified reactions
largely of the _incoherent_ type; and (3) the tendency toward
_stereotypy_ manifested chiefly by abnormally frequent
repetitions of the same reaction. Fairly characteristic also is the
occasional tendency to give sound reactions. Again, occasionally one
encounters pronounced _perseveration_, and at least two of our
subjects gave a good many unclassified reactions obviously due to
_distraction_.

It must be noted that not infrequently cases of dementia præcox give
test records that cannot be distinguished from normal. It seems that
the pathological associational tendencies constitute merely a special
group of symptoms, some of which may be expected to be manifest in
cases which have reached a state of advanced mental deterioration, but
may not necessarily be present in the early stages of the disease. On
the other hand there is evidence to show that these tendencies may in
some cases appear among the earliest manifestations. This matter will
be referred to again.

Thus the test records of dementia præcox depart from the normal not
sharply but by a gradual shading off. We find similar gradual
transitions between dementia præcox and other psychoses. For this
work we selected cases in which the diagnoses were established with
reasonable certainty. Whether or not in cases of doubtful clinical
classification this association test may be of aid in determining the
diagnosis, is a question that must for the present remain open.

We submit herewith copies of test records. The numbers which appear
after the reactions indicate in each case the reaction type, in
accordance with Table III. (p. 27); common specific reactions are not
numbered.


CASE No. 4752.--H.J. Neologisms; some unclassified reactions, mostly
incoherent.

Table--meadow.........19
Dark--black...........
Music--sweet..........
Sickness--dead........ 2
Man--manion........... 3
Deep--near............19
Soft--sooner..........19
Eating--formble....... 4
Mountain--gair........ 4
House--temble......... 4
Black--benched........ 4
Mutton--ranched....... 4
Comfort--bumble....... 4
Hand--semble.......... 4
Short--simber......... 4
Fruit--narrow.........13
Butterfly--Ben........19
Smooth--gum...........19
Command--bramble......19
Chair--low............
Sweet--temper.........19
Whistle--bensid....... 4
Woman--hummery........ 4
Cold--gunst........... 4
Slow--bemper.......... 4
Wish--tip.............19
River--gumper......... 4
White--Andes..........19
Beautiful--giinper.... 4
Window--hummer........ 4
Rough--geep........... 4
Citizen--humper....... 4
Foot--zuper........... 4
Spider--gumper........ 4
Needle--himper........ 4
Red--gumper........... 4
Sleep--moop........... 4
Anger--rumble.........19
Carpet--slamper....... 4
Girl--Mnker........... 4
High--bumper.......... 4
Working--gumpip....... 4
Sour--imper........... 4
Earth--gumper......... 4
Trouble--humper....... 4
Soldier--guipper...... 4
Cabbage--phar......... 4
Hard--her.............12
Eagle--damnornott..... 4
Stomach--dumper....... 4
Stem--gumper.......... 4
Lamp--huntenit........ 4
Dream--hungnot........ 4
Yellow--bampir........ 4
Bread--gumper......... 4
Justice--sidnerber.... 4
Boy--eeper............ 4
Light--huntznit....... 4
Health--geeper........ 4
Bible--himpier........ 4
Memory--hummer........19
Sheep--hunner......... 4
Bath--bemnitper....... 4
Cottage--gumper....... 4
Swift--dumper......... 4
Blue--dipper..........19
Hungry--hummer........ 3
Priest--rump..........19
Ocean--himmer......... 4
Head--hiniper......... 4
Stove--gamper......... 4
Long--humble..........19
Religion--gumper...... 4
Whiskey--numper....... 4
Child--himmer......... 4
Bitter--gehimper...... 3
Hammer--gueep......... 4
Thirsty--humper....... 4
City--deeper..........19
Square--bummer........ 4
Butter--bimper........ 3
Doctor--harner........ 4
Loud--harner.......... 4
Thief--himmer......... 4
Lion--humor...........19
Joy--gumpier.......... 4
Bed--hoomer........... 4
Heavy--doomer......... 4
Tobacco--per..........12
Baby--hoomer.......... 4
Moon--gumper.......... 4
Scissors--gumper...... 4
Quiet--humper......... 4
Green--gueet.......... 3
Salt--rummer.......... 4
Street--numper........ 4
King--himper.......... 4
Cheese--guinter....... 4
Blossom--yunger....... 4
Afraid--yunger........ 4


CASE No. 5183.--G. D. Neologisms; numerous unclassified reactions,
mostly incoherent; some sound neologisms.

Table--muss...........19
Dark--gone............19
Music--caffa.......... 4
Sickness--monk........19
Man--boy..............
Deep--lesson..........19
Soft--ness............ 4
Eating--pie............
Mountain--Gus.........19
House--muss...........15
Black--court..........19
Mutton--beef..........
Comfort--ness......... 4
Hand--koy............. 4
Short--ness........... 4
Fruit--dalb........... 4
Butterfly--flack...... 4
Smooth--mess..........19
Command--cork.........19
Chair--ness........... 4
Sweet--Bess...........17
Whistle--toy..........
Woman--girl...........
Cold--cork............15
Slow--mass............19
Wish--veil............ 4
River--mouth..........17
White--cast...........17
Beautiful--ness....... 4
Window--crow..........19
Rough--ratter.........19
Citizen--zide......... 4
Foot--malloy.......... 4
Spider--straw.........19
Needle--cast..........15
Red--Roman............19
Sleep--scack.......... 4
Anger--gois........... 4
Carpet--noise.........13
Girl--call............18
High--hort............ 4
Working--kaffir.......19
Sour--romerscotters... 4
Earth--bell...........19
Trouble--tramine...... 4
Soldier--gas..........19
Cabbage--cor.......... 4
Hard--kalbas.......... 4
Eagle--bell...........15
Stomach--chenic....... 4
Stem--trackstar....... 3
Lamp--loss............19
Dream--melso.......... 4
Yellow--ormondo....... 4
Bread--life...........
Justice--quartz.......19
Boy--nellan........... 4
Light--cor............ 4
Health--hallenbee..... 4
Bible--book...........
Memory--bike..........19
Sheep--armen.......... 4
Bath--cor............. 4
Cottage--callan....... 4
Swift--swar........... 3
Blue--blacksen........ 4
Hungry--scatterbuck... 4
Priest--canon.........17
Ocean--men............19
Head--will............19
Stove--somen.......... 4
Long--lass............19
Religion--cor......... 4
Whiskey--hanrow....... 4
Child--vand........... 4
Bitter--bike..........15
Hammer--hemmel........ 3
Thirsty--cass......... 4
City--cor............. 4
Square--malice........19
Butter--back..........19
Doctor--ness.......... 4
Loud--arman........... 4
Thief--cast...........15
Lion--loss............15
Joy--kaffir...........15
Bed--banrow........... 4
Heavy--cast...........15
Tobacco--colrow....... 4
Baby--boil............19
Moon--padoc........... 4
Scissors--kantow...... 4
Quiet--kilroe......... 4
Green--graft..........10
Salt--semen...........19
Street--pess.......... 4
King--guess...........19
Cheese--tiffer........ 4
Blossom--cad..........19
Afraid--mellows.......19


CASE No. 1500.--D.V. Considerable number of neologisms; stereotypy
manifested partly in a tendency toward frequent repetition of certain
reactions but mainly in a persistent tendency to make use of the
grammatical form of present participle, giving rise to numerous
doubtful reactions.

Table--stand..........
Dark--lonesome........
Music--playing........
Sickness--disease.....
Man--hiding...........19
Deep--unreckless...... 4
Soft--beginning.......19
Eating--plenty........
Mountain--high........
House--standing....... 6
Black--grivelling..... 4
Mutton--plenty........15
Comfort--laying.......19
Hand--disease.........15
Short--writing........13
Fruit--coming.........19
Butterfly--flying.....
Smooth--glimming...... 4
Command--master.......
Chair--standing....... 6
Sweet--sugar..........
Whistle--blowing......
Woman--loving.........
Cold--cellar..........19
Slow--coming..........15
Wish--dreaming........ 2
River--divided........19
White--wall...........
Beautiful--pleasant... 1
Window--breaking...... 2
Rough--tumble.........
Citizen--gentleman....
Foot--sweating........19
Spider--biting........ 2
Needle--stinging...... 2
Red--coloring.........
Sleep--dreaming.......
Anger--widing......... 4
Carpet--cleaning......
Girl--pretty.......... 1
High--degrace......... 4
Working--nobody.......19
Sour--holling......... 4
Earth--disgrace.......19
Trouble--plenty.......
Soldier--shooting.....13
Cabbage--welldebell... 4
Hard--earning......... 4
Eagle--setting........19
Stomach--degrivel..... 4
Stem--biting..........19
Lamp--burning.........
Dream--walking........19
Yellow--blowing.......15
Bread--making.........
Justice--unpossible... 4
Boy--growing.......... 2
Light--stand.......... 6
Health--raising.......19
Bible--teaching....... 2
Memory--together......12
Sheep--weeding........19
Bath--held............19
Cottage--standing..... 2
Swift--incuriossable.. 4
Blue--smooven......... 4
Hungry--uncareless.... 4
Priest--going.........19
Ocean--moving......... 2
Head--setting.........15
Stove--warm...........
Long--slowly.......... 2
Religion--everything..19
Whiskey--burning......
Child--born...........
Bitter--taking........19
Hammer--hitting....... 2
Thirsty--drinking.....
City--welldebell...... 4
Square--taking........15
Butter--soft..........
Doctor--instrument....19
Loud--speaking........ 2
Thief--gitting........ 4
Lion--scared..........17
Joy--playing.......... 2
Bed--laying........... 2
Heavy--raisen......... 4
Tobacco--eating.......19
Baby--born............
Moon--shining.........
Scissors--cutting.....

Quiet--hitting........15
Green--landed.........19
Salt--throwing........19
Street--walking.......
King--tension.........19
Cheese--eating........
Blossom--growing...... 2
Afraid--nobody........


CASE No. 5138.--C.J. Unclassified reactions, mostly incoherent.

Table--tablecloth.....
Dark--forward.........19
Music--instrument.....
Sickness--fluid.......19
Man--hemale........... 4
Deep--steep...........
Soft--hard............
Eating--mountain......19
Mountain--raven.......19
House--shutter........17
Black--blue...........
Mutton--beef..........
Comfort--discomfort...
Hand--wrist...........
Short--tall...........
Fruit--vegetable......
Butterfly--bee........
Smooth--rough.........
Command--orders.......
Chair--sofa...........
Sweet--sour...........
Whistle--fife.........
Woman--girl...........
Cold--warm............
Slow--faster.......... 2
Wish--not............. 2
River--neck...........17
White--blue...........
Beautiful--homely.....
Window--sill..........
Rough--paint..........19
Citizen--pedestrian...19
Foot--rose............19
Spider--towel.........19
Needle--lifter........19
Red--dove.............19
Sleep--coat...........13
Anger--smile..........19
Carpet--gas...........19
Girl--kite............19
High--cow.............19
Working--candy........19
Sour--peach...........17
Earth--balloon........19
Trouble--grass........13
Soldier--brass........17
Cabbage--flea.........19
Hard--cat.............19
Eagle--negro..........10
Stomach--winter.......19
Stem--leaf............
Lamp--cloth...........19
Dream--slumber........
Yellow--pink..........
Bread--glass..........19
Justice--coal.........19
Boy--maid.............
Light--shine..........
Health--pale..........17
Bible--leaf...........
Memory--grief.........19
Sheep--giraffe........19
Bath--soap............
Cottage--scene........19
Swift--slow...........
Blue--piece...........19
Hungry--food..........
Priest--minister......
Ocean--waves..........
Head--black...........
Stove--lid............
Long--short...........
Religion--Christian...
Whiskey--malt.........
Child--baby...........
Bitter--sweet.........
Hammer--nail..........
Thirsty--water........
City--steeple.........19
Square--marble........19
Butter--bread.........
Doctor--aster.........19
Loud--fog.............19
Thief--Mary...........19
Lion--tiger...........
Joy--glad.............
Bed--sheet............
Heavy--light..........
Tobacco--smoke........
Baby--powder..........
Moon--sky.............
Scissors--handle......
Quiet--sing...........19
Green--pink...........
Salt--chimney.........19
Street--block.........
King--crown...........
Cheese--tea...........17
Blossom--leaves.......
Afraid--frighten......


CASE No. 17979.--R.T. Unclassified reactions, mostly incoherent.

Table--full...........19
Dark--coldness........ 2
Music--aeronaut.......19
Sickness--better......
Man--extension........19
Deep--electrician.....19
Soft--harden.......... 2
Eating--stomach.......
Mountain--Lord........19
House--roof...........
Black--darkness.......
Mutton--working.......19
Comfort--ahead........12
Hand--mercury.........19
Short--have...........12
Fruit--flavor.........19
Butterfly--plant......13
Smooth--level.........
Command--obedient.....
Chair--rest...........
Sweet--polish.........19
Whistle--note.........
Woman--comfort........
Cold--pleasant........ 1
Slow--move............
Wish--wealth..........
River--shell..........19
White--change.........19
Beautiful--sat........19
Window--temperature...39
Rough--shell..........15
Citizen--soldier......
Foot--travel..........
Spider--web...........
Needle--point.........
Red--temperature......15
Sleep--rest...........
Anger--temper.........
Carpet--court.........10
Girl--birth...........10
High--dirt............19
Working--ease.........
Sour--bait............ 4
Earth--vexation.......19
Trouble--business.....
Soldier--obedient..... 2
Cabbage--fell.........19
Hard--solid...........
Eagle--government.....19
Stomach--chest........
Stem--wish............19
Lamp--brilliancy......17
Dream--unso........... 4
Yellow--color.........
Bread--crust..........
Justice--truth........
Boy--obedient.........
Light--heart.......... 2
Health--feeling.......
Bible--scripture......
Memory--saying........19
Sheep--wool...........
Bath--get.............19
Cottage--morrell...... 4
Swift--good........... 1
Blue--look............19
Hungry--have..........12
Priest--scripture.....15
Ocean--supply.........19
Head--manager.........17
Stove--shake..........19
Long--journey.........
Religion--thought..... 1
Whiskey--lusk......... 4
Child--wish...........15
Bitter--enmalseladiga. 4
Hammer--efface........19
Thirsty--want.........
City--comforts........15
Square--crown.........19
Butter--flavor........15
Doctor--dram..........19
Loud--temper..........15
Thief--catched........ 2
Lion--crown...........15
Joy--pleasure......... 1
Bed--comforts.........
Heavy--thoughts....... 1
Tobacco--changes......15
Baby--pleasure........ 1
Moon--brilliancy...... 2
Scissors--edge........
Quiet--baptism........19
Green--autumn.........19
Salt--gather..........19
Street--thoroughfare..
King--crown...........
Cheese--flavor........15
Blossom--wood.........17
Afraid--downhearted...17


CASE No. 3307.--G.F. Unclassified reactions, mostly incoherent; slight
tendency to respond by sound reactions.

Table--desk...........
Dark--blue............
Music--stars..........13
Sickness--trees.......19
Man--menace...........10
Deep--soap............19
Soft--excited.........19
Eating--spelling......10
Mountain--marbles.....19
House--train..........19
Black--bed............19
Mutton--button........10
Comfort--steak........13
Hand--flexible........19
Short--umbrella.......17
Fruit--blanket........19
Butterfly--grass......
Smooth--sheet.........19
Command--carpet.......19
Chair--store..........19
Sweet--flower.........
Whistle--linen........19
Woman--water..........19
Cold--coal............
Slow--ferry...........17
Wish--sample..........19
River--shades.........19
Whiter--blue..........
Beautiful--suspender..19
Window--wood..........
Rough--chisel.........19
Citizen--ruler........
Foot--snake...........19
Spider--fly...........
Needle--bird..........13
Red--green............
Sleep--opening........19
Anger--angry..........
Carpet--stitching.....19
Girl--madam...........17
High--ceiling.........
Working--easy.........
Sour--warm............19
Earth--heaven.........
Trouble--astonished...19
Soldier--man.......... 1
Cabbage--carrot.......
Hard--softness........ 2
Eagle--parrot.........
Stomach--mind.........19
Stem--stable..........10
Lamp--oil.............
Dream--awake..........
Yellow--darkness...... 2
Bread--rough..........19
Justice--male.........19
Boy--buoy.............10
Light--standing.......19
Health--very..........12
Bible--ashamed........19
Memory--staring.......19
Sheep--stock..........
Bath--sponge..........
Cottage--house........
Swift--mouse..........19
Blue--fall............19
Hungry--appetite......
Priest--pastor........
Ocean--waves..........
Head--hat.............
Stove--blackening..... 2
Long--garden..........19
Religion--goodness.... 1
Whiskey--Kummell......17
Child--woman.......... 1
Bitter--coughing......19
Hammer--sofa..........19
Thirsty--pillow.......18
City--united..........19
Square--oblong........
Butter--lard..........
Doctor--physician.....
Loud--easy............
Thief--burglar........
Lion--tiger...........
Joy--healthy.......... 2
Bed--thread...........10
Heavy--gloves.........17
Tobacco--cigar........
Baby--hood............11
Moon--stars...........
Scissors--knife.......
Quiet--recollect......17
Green--ring...........19
Salt--pencil..........19
Street--bushes........19
King--Germany.........17
Cheese--rice..........17
Blossom--pepper.......19
Afraid--allspice......18


CASE NO. 971.--O.M. Unclassified reactions, mostly incoherent.

Table--vote...........19
Dark--plenty..........19
Music--health.........19
Sickness--fright......
Man--manager..........10
Deep--slow............19
Soft--pepper..........19
Eating--vanity........19
Mountains--slept......19
House--courage........19
Black--funeral........
Mutton--age...........19
Comfort--slide........19
Hand--credit..........19

Short--Simpson........17
Fruit--physician......19
Butterfly--torment....19
Smooth--button........17
Command--scarf........19
Chair--rage...........19
Sweet--cider..........17
Whistle--lace.........19
Woman--debt...........19
Cold--powderly........ 4
Slow--telephone.......19
Wish--regret..........17
River--herald.........19
White--black..........
Beautiful--jolly......19
Window--pane..........
Rough--duty...........19
Citizen--ward.........17
Foot--minister........19
Spider--handsome......19
Needle--pin...........
Red--white............
Sleep--apple..........13
Anger--sour...........19
Carpet--wood..........
Girl--boy.............
High--low.............
Working--height.......13
Sour--pitcher.........19
Earth--clam...........19
Trouble--necessity.... 9
Soldier--marine.......
Cabbage--watermelon...17
Hard--cracker.........17
Eagle--bright.........19
Stomach--back.........
Stem--stimulant.......10
Lamp--hair............19
Dream--knees..........19
Yellow--amen..........12
Bread--general........19
Justice--no........... 2
Boy--grass............19
Light--thought........ 9
Health--depression....17
Bible--judger......... 4
Memory--stomach.......19
Sheep--crusade........19
Bath--labor...........19
Cottage--cotton.......10
Swift--depth..........19
Blue--crimson.........17
Hungry--alloyed.......19
Priest--politicians...17
Ocean--sea............
Head--cranium.........
Stove--soft...........19
Long--biles........... 4
Religion--bunion......10
Whiskey--vinegar......17
Child--edge...........19
Bitter--born..........10
Hammer--wood..........
Thirsty--cradle.......19
City--flames..........19
Square--eating........19
Butter--dirt..........19
Doctor--malefactor....19
Loud--quinine.........19
Thief--joy............19
Lion--sage............19
Joy--thorn............19
Bed--draper...........19
Heavy--close..........19
Tobacco--weed.........
Baby--stop............19
Moon--starch..........19
Scissors--crepe.......17
Quiet--bustle.........19
Green--color..........
Salt--throw...........19
Street--ferment.......19
King--jaunce.......... 4
Cheese--tepid.........19
Blossom--woman........ 9
Afraid--shame.........17


CASE No. 01665.--E.H. Unclassified reactions, mostly incoherent.

Table--cent...........19
Dark--sweet...........19
Music--delighted...... 2
Sickness--pop.........19
Man--change...........19
Deep--pass............19
Soft--drop............19
Eating--fair..........19
Mountains--heavy......19
House--fate...........19
Black--right..........19
Mutton--with..........12
Comfort--indeed.......12
Hand--span............10
Short--stop...........
Fruit--dip............19
Butterfly--home.......19
Smooth--days..........19
Command--stop.........15
Chair--pledge.........19
Sweet--right..........15
Whistle--home.........15
Woman--Louisa.........17
Cold--chair...........16
Slow--aid.............19
Wish--book............ 2
River--shoes..........19
White--ouch...........12
Beautiful--not........12
Window--papers........19
Rough--lettuce........19
Citizen--money........17
Foot--stand...........
Spider--socks.........19
Needle--drops.........15
Red--glass............17
Sleep--suits..........19
Anger--suits.......... 5
Carpet--hat...........19
Girl--president.......19
High--pass............19
Working--knock.......19
Sour--cake............19
Earth--home...........
Trouble--news.........17
Soldier--name.........19
Cabbage--rule.........19
Hard--rope............19
Eagle--in.............12
Stomach--potato.......17
Stem--pick............
Lamp--berry...........18
Dream--book...........
Yellow--lettuce.......19
Bread--chews..........17
Justice--night........15
Boy--bat..............17
Light--rasp...........19
Health--off...........12
Bible--comforter...... 2
Memory--candy.........19
Sheep--eat............
Bath--sweet...........19
Cottage--walk.........19
Swift--reason.........19
Blue--dot.............19
Hungry--swift.........16
Priest--birth.........19
Ocean--stop...........15
Head--strap...........19
Stove--pot............17
Long--name............
Religion--day.........13
Whiskey--take.........19
Child--jaw............17
Bitter--licorice......17
Hammer--sound.........
Thirsty--cards........19
City--dice............18
Square--muff..........19
Butter--stick.........19
Doctor--perfect.......19
Loud--walk............15
Thief--jail...........
Lion--cow.............
Joy--nail.............19
Bed--new..............19
Heavy--down...........12
Tobacco--prize........19
Baby--new.............15
Moon--new.............
Scissors--teach.......19
Quiet--man............ 1
Green--water..........17
Salt--money...........19
Street--right.........15
King--girl............19
Cheese--house.........19
Blossom--work......... 1
Afraid--jars..........19


CASE M.F. (from Hudson River State Hospital).--Unclassified reactions,
mostly incoherent.

Table--heat...........19
Dark--succeed.........19
Music--benefit........19
Sickness--steep.......19
Man--dicut............ 4
Deep--rectify.........19
Soft--bed.............
Eating--dozy..........19
Mountain--tulu........ 4
House--sails..........19
Black--sunrise........19
Mutton--tuition.......19
Comfort--blasphemous..19
Hand--doing...........
Short--pest...........19
Fruit--charm..........19
Butterfly--doctor.....19
Smooth--border........19
Command--right........
Chair--distill........19
Sweet--noticed........19
Whistle--stead........19
Woman--splice.........19
Cold--strap...........19
Slow--chief...........19
Wish--shame...........19
River--word...........19
White--color..........
Beautiful--better.....19
Window--dull..........19
Rough--bright.........18
Citizen--chum.........19
Foot--relax...........19
Spider--float.........19
Needle--action........19
Red--stout............19
Sleep--lazy...........17
Anger--anguish........
Carpet--knowledge.....19
Girl--first...........10
High--hand............19
Working--power........17
Sour--mud.............19
Earth--sky............
Trouble--sorrow.......
Soldier--manhood...... 2
Cabbage--righteous....19
Hard--beaten..........17
Eagle--dog............19
Stomach--paste........19
Stem--dust............10
Lamp--fall............19
Dream--idle...........17
Yellow--zone..........19
Bread--pan............17
Justice--tricks.......17
Boy--barrel...........19
Light--powers.........15
Health--kindness......19
Bible--story..........
Memory--pillow........19
Sheep--veil...........19
Bath--ink.............19
Cottage--paper........19
Swift--arrow..........
Blue--cold............
Hungry--dyes..........19
Priest--cloak.........19
Ocean--pilot..........17
Head--tin.............19
Stove--plate..........17
Long--trouble.........19
Religion--soap........19
Whiskey--starch.......18
Child--night..........19
Bitter--contentment...19

Hammer--shortness.....19
Thirsty--knife........19
City--mind............19
Square--truth......... 2
Butter--biscuit.......
Doctor--piles.........17
Loud--distrust........19
Thief--babies.........19
Lion--hair............
Joy--eyesight.........19

Bed--dievos........... 4
Heavy--determined.....19
Tobacco--health.......19
Baby--wood............19
Moon--heat............15
Scissors--squeeze.....19
Quiet--tears..........19
Green--fall...........15
Salt--soft............10
Street--wait..........19
King--inches..........19
Cheese--doctor........15
Blossom--fades........19
Afraid--hearts........ 2


CASE No. 01552.--E.J.D. Unclassified reactions, mostly incoherent.

Table--unicorn..........19
Dark--African...........17
Music--love.............
Sickness--slumber.......17
Man--minstrel...........10
Deep--river.............
Soft--highwayman........19
Eating--England.........19
Mountain--pleasure...... 1
House--Christianity.....19
Black--directory........19
Mutton--capers..........19
Comfort--mankind........12
Hand--surface...........19
Short--court............10
Fruit--pleasure.........
Butterfly--dispatcher...19
Smooth--navigation......19
Command--administration. 9
Chair--time.............19
Sweet--office...........13
Whistle--foreign........19
Woman--usefulness.......
Cold--frigid............
Slow--vocation..........19
Wish--longing...........
River--tributary........17
White--island...........
Beautiful--unseen.......19
Window--frugal..........19
Rough--nautical.........19
Citizen--pedestrian.....19
Foot--laugh.............19
Spider--jungle..........19
Needle--man............. 9
Red--monde.............. 4
Sleep--resustication.... 4
Anger--uncared..........19
Carpet--foreign.........15
Girl--celt..............19
High--wine..............10
Working--prayer.........19
Sour--flower............10
Earth--tariff...........19
Trouble--ledger.........19
Soldier--work...........
Cabbage--ancient........19
Hard--provender.........19
Eagle--school...........19
Stomach--bowels.........
Stem--tide..............
Lamp--scientific........19
Dream--somno.............4
Yellow--pain............19
Bread--populous.........19
Justice--thwart.........19
Boy--globe..............19
Light--female...........13
Health--linen...........19
Bible--divine...........17
Memory--current.........19
Sheep--water............
Bath--rain..............18
Cottage--journal........19
Swift--yacht............17
Blue--novel.............19
Hungry--viand........... 2
Priest--pedestrian......15
Ocean--commotion........10
Head--sugar.............19
Stove--writer...........19
Long--mingle............19
Religion--tent..........
Whiskey--copulency...... 4
Child--editor...........19
Bitter--backward........19
Hammer--youth...........19
Thirsty--salt...........17
City--gentler...........19
Square--angelus.........19
Butter--pastry..........17
Doctor--veterinary......17
Loud--muslin............19
Chief--grocer...........19
Lion--trip..............19
Joy--penance............17
Bed--granite............19
Heavy--note.............19
Tobacco--vanese......... 4
Baby--school............15
Moon--element...........19
Scissors--elderly.......19
Quiet--trinity..........19
Green--commissioner.....19
Salt--strength..........19
Street--voyager.........19
King--sorrow............19
Cheese--holiday.........19
Blossom--parks..........19
Afraid--stamina.........17


CASE No. 667.--C.L. Pronounced stereotypy. Following note on test
record: "Many attempts were made to secure a reaction other than
'cat,' but usually without success; the reaction _cold--warm_ was
given spontaneously and with apparent interest; most reactions were
given only in response to much urging, or else mechanically, without
attention."

Table--cat............ 6
Dark--rat.............18
Music--shoe...........19
Sickness--cat......... 6
Man--boy..............
Deep--cat............. 6
Soft--hat.............19
Eating--cat........... 6
Mountain--hit.........19
House--gold...........19
Black--woman.......... 9
Mutton--get...........19
Comfort--cousin.......19
Hand--Jesus...........19
Short--hat............15
Fruit--hand...........16
Butterfly--going......19
Smooth--hat...........15
Command--boy..........
Chair--hat............15
Sweet--cat............ 6
Whistle--boy..........
Woman--cat............
Cold--warm............
Slow--button..........19
Wish--cat............. 6
River--cat............ 5
White--rat............15
Beautiful--good....... 1
Window--wheel.........19
Rough--good........... 9
Citizen--candy........19
Foot--cat............. 6
Spider--dog...........19
Needle--cat........... 6
Red--button...........15
Sleep--cat............ 6
Anger--go.............15
Carpet--cat........... 6
Girl--in..............12
High--little..........19
Working--cold.........19
Sour--cat............. 6
Earth--tag............19
Trouble--cat.......... 6
Soldier--cat.......... 5
Cabbage--cat.......... 5
Hard--cat............. 5
Eagle--cat............ 5
Stomach--cat..........
Stem--hat.............15
Lamp--cat............. 6
Dream--cat............ 5
Yellow--cat...........
Bread--cat............ 5
Justice--cat.......... 5
Boy--cat.............. 5
Light--cat............ 5
Health--cat........... 5
Bible--cat............ 5
Memory--cat........... 5
Sheep--cat............ 5
Bath--cat............. 5
Cottage--cat.......... 5
Swift--cat............
Blue--cat............. 5
Hungry--cat........... 5
Priest--cat........... 5
Ocean--cat............ 5
Head--cat............. 5
Stove--cat............ 5
Long--cat............. 5
Religion--cat......... 5
Whiskey--cat.......... 5
Child--cat............ 5
Bitter--cat........... 5
Hammer--cat........... 5
Thirsty--cat.......... 5
City--cat............. 5
Square--cat........... 5
Butter--cat........... 5
Doctor--cat........... 5
Loud--cat............. 5
Thief--cat............ 5
Lion--cat.............
Joy--cat.............. 5
Bed--cat.............. 5
Heavy--cat............ 5
Tobacco--cat.......... 5
Baby--cat............. 5
Moon--cat............. 5
Scissors--cat......... 5
Quiet--cat............ 5
Green--cat............ 5
Salt--cat............. 5
Street--cat........... 5
King--cat............. 5
Cheese--cat........... 5
Blossom--cat.......... 5
Afraid--cat...........


CASE No. 6006.--E.T.S. Stereotypy

Table--eat............
Dark--unkindness......19
Music--beautiful...... 1
Sickness--suffering...
Man--good............. 1
Deep--unkindness......15
Soft--unkindness...... 5
Eating--digesting.....

Mountain--low.........
House--small.......... 1
Black--darkness.......
Mutton--good.......... 1
Comfort--home.........
Hand--useful.......... 1
Short--useful......... 5
Fruit--healthy........
Butterfly--beautiful.. 1
Smooth--unkindness....15
Command--great........ 9
Chair--useful......... 1
Sweet--healthy........15
Whistle--beautiful.... 6
Woman--good........... 1
Cold--unhealthy.......19
Slow--good............ 6
Wish--always..........12
River--needed......... 6
White--pretty......... 1

Beautiful--trees......
Window--needed........ 6
Rough--unneeded....... 4
Citizen--needed....... 6
Foot--needed.......... 2
Spider--needed........ 5
Needle--needed........ 5
Red--beautiful........ 2
Sleep--beautiful...... 1
Anger--needed......... 6
Carpet--needed........ 5
Girl--needed.......... 5
High--height..........
Working--needed....... 6
Sour--needed.......... 5
Earth--needed......... 5
Trouble--trust........10
Soldier--needed....... 6
Cabbage--needed....... 5
Hard--trouble.........
Eagle--beautiful...... 6
Stomach--trouble......
Stem--shoot...........10
Lamp--light...........
Dream--pleasant....... 1
Yellow--pretty........ 1
Bread--good........... 1
Justice--needed....... 6
Boy--needed........... 5
Light--Pretty......... 6
Health--needed........
Bible--needed......... 5
Memory--needed........ 2
Sheep--needed......... 5
Bath--needed.......... 5
Cottage--needed....... 5
Swift--needed......... 5
Blue--pretty.......... 1
Hungry--food..........
Priest--Father........

Ocean--fresh..........19
Head--unhealthy.......15
Stove--warmth.........
Long--length..........
Religion--needed...... 2
Whiskey--needed....... 5
Child--needed.........
Bitter--needed........ 5
Hammer--needed........ 5
Thirsty--water........
City--pretty.......... 6
Square--honest........
Butter--good.......... 1
Doctor--needed........
Loud--needed.......... 5
Thieft--trust.........
Lion--love............19
Joy--laughter.........
Bed--comfortable......
Heavy--sleepiness..... 2
Tobacco--needed....... 6
Baby--needed.......... 5
Moon--needed.......... 5
Scissors--needed...... 5
Quiet--pleasure....... 1
Green--me.............18
Salt--needed..........
Street--needed........ 5
King--needed.......... 5
Cheese--needed........ 5
Blossom--needed....... 5
Afraid--nervous.......



CASE No. 2292.--C.M. Perseveration: numerous instances of association
to preceding reaction; unclassified reactions, mostly incoherent.

Table--tree...........19
Dark--night...........
Music--instrument.....
Sickness--smoke.......19
Man--woman............ 1
Deep--water...........
Soft--tide............18
Eating--potato........
Mountain--milk........13
House--clay...........17
Black--polish.........17
Mutton--goat..........
Comfort--cream........10
Hand--hay.............19
Short--meat...........19
Fruit--pears..........
Butterfly--flower.....
Smooth--smell.........10
Command--drink........19
Chair--wine...........18
Sweet--honey..........
Whistle--wind.........
Woman--whiskey........19

Cold--fire............
Slow--speed...........
Wish--go..............
River--boat...........
White--stem...........13
Beautiful--cloak......17
Window--drift.........19
Rough--storm..........
Citizen--citron.......10
Foot--feed............19
Spider--web...........
Needle--thread........
Red--sew..............13
Sleep--rest...........
Anger--health.........13
Carpet--carrots.......10
Girl--eat.............19
High--horse...........19
Working--hay..........15
Sour--cut.............19
Earth--machine........19
Trouble--repair.......18
Soldier--mow..........19
Cabbage--plant........
Hard--seed............18
Eagle--bird...........
Stomach--egg..........17
Stem--join............
Lamp--oil.............
Dream--burn...........13
Yellow--gas...........18
Bread--flour..........
Justices--drink.......19
Boy--girl.............
Light--man............ 9
Health--woman......... 1
Bible--baby...........10
Memory--want..........19
Sheep--lamb...........
Bath--water...........
Cottage--hay..........15
Swift--corn...........18
Blue--eat.............18
Hungry--ham...........17
Priest--pickle........18
Ocean--turnip.........18
Head--hair............
Stove--coal...........
Long--wood............13
Religion--lemon.......10
Whiskey--wheat........17
Child--rye............18
Bitter--medicine......
Hammer--nail..........
Thirsty--beer.........
City--cake............19
Square--pie...........18
Butter--cream.........
Doctor--herb..........19
Loud--duck............19
Thief--feathers.......18
Lion--animal..........
Joy--peace............
Bed--sleep............
Heavy--rest...........13
Tobacco--chew.........
Baby--chair...........19
Moon--sun.............
Scissors--cut.........
Quiet--hair...........18
Green--grapes.........
Salt--bag.............19
Street--stone.........
King--cement..........18
Cheese--money.........19
Blossom--flower.......
Afraid--fast..........19


CASE No. 17880.--E.D. Numerous repetitions of reactions previously
given; unclassified reactions, mostly incoherent; neologisms.

Table--eating.........
Dark--night...........
Music--piano..........
Sickness--stoppery.... 4
Man--manly............
Deep--knowing......... 6
Soft--undoable........ 4
Eating--oblong........19
Mountain--guide.......19
House--residing....... 2
Black--dress..........
Mutton--aiding........19
Comfort--escorted..... 6
Hand--escorted........ 5
Short--unescorted.....18
Fruit--eating.........
Butterfly--interfere..19
Smooth--knowing....... 6
Command--unerrorer.... 4
Chair--seated.........
Sweet--durable........19
Whistle--treated......19
Woman--help........... 2
Cold--stoppery........ 4
Slow--unknowing....... 4
Wish--treated.........15
River--boats..........
White--treasurer......19
Beautiful--form.......
Window--outlook.......
Rough--unescorted.....15
Citizen--residing..... 2
Foot--travel..........
Spider--stoppery...... 4
Needle--clothing...... 2
Red--color............
Sleep--stoppery....... 4
Anger--unguarded......17
Carpet--residence.....15
Girl--help............ 6
High--escorted........ 6
Working--man.......... 1
Sour--form............15
Earth--platformer..... 4
Trouble--unguarded....15
Soldier--sentinel..... 2
Cabbage--dinners...... 2
Hard--escorted........ 6
Eagle--newspaper......17
Stomach--health.......
Stem--winding.........
Lamp--reading.........
Dream--guarded........19
Yellow--aged..........19
Bread--knowing........ 6
Justice--bar..........17
Boy--help............. 6
Light--advice.........19
Health--doableness.... 4
Bible--church.........
Memory--knowing....... 2
Sheep--aided..........15
Bath--stoppery........ 4
Cottage--seashore.....
Swift--business.......17
Blue--help............ 6
Hungry--unadded....... 4
Priest--Rome..........19
Ocean--help........... 6
Head--knowing......... 2
Stove--cooking........
Long--bank............19
Religion--church......
Whiskey--drink........
Child--help........... 6
Bitter--error.........16
Hammer--builder....... 2
Thirsty--drink........
City--building........
Square--unerrorer..... 4
Butter--eating........
Doctor--destroyer.....10
Loud--notoriety.......17
Thief--error..........15
Lion--lord............19
Joy--escorted......... 6
Bed--unescorted.......15
Heavy--unescorted..... 5
Tobacco--chewing......
Baby--help............ 6
Moon--knowing......... 6
Scissors--tailor......
Quiet--form...........15
Green--moneyed........19
Salt--eating..........
Street--city..........
King--adds............19
Cheese--eating........
Blossom--escorted..... 6
Afraid--unguarded.....15


CASE No. 6065.--A.F. Unclassified reactions, mostly incoherent;
perseveration: instances of association to preceding reaction and to
preceding stimulus.

Table--stove..........19
Dark--clear...........19
Music--calm...........19
Sickness--exact.......19
Man--particular.......18
Deep--personal........18
Soft--frank...........19
Eating--determined....19
Mountain--idea........19
House--street.........
Black--water..........
Mutton--ground........19
Comfort--country......18
Hand--fire............19
Short--straight.......10
Fruit--flowers........
Butterfly--horn.......19
Smooth--farm..........19
Command--forbidden.... 2
Chair--bed............
Sweet--sugar..........
Whistle--noise........
Woman--boy............
Cold--house...........13
Slow--store...........14
Wish--work............19
River--sound..........17
White--blue...........
Beautiful--fair.......
Window--door..........
Rough--glass..........13
Citizen--dress........19
Foot--exact...........15
Spider--fly...........
Needle--pins..........
Red--person........... 9
Sleep--nervous........17
Anger--determined.....15
Carpet--floor.........
Girl--man............. 1
High--fruit...........19
Working--wear.........10
Sour--sweet...........
Earth--early..........10
Trouble--state........19
Soldier--girl.........18
Cabbage--woman........ 9
Hard--heart...........
Eagle--bird...........
Stomach--friend.......19
Stem--tree............
Lamp--couch...........19
Dream--desk...........19
Yellow--table.........
Bread--chair..........14
Justice--truth........
Boy--honor............13
Light--tails..........19
Health--care..........
Bible--book...........
Memory--remembrance...
Sheep--free...........19
Bath--court...........19
Cottage--pitcher......19
Swift--strong.........
Blue--delicate........18
Hungry--bread.........
Priest--church........
Ocean--ship...........
Head--height.......... 2
Stove--people......... 9
Long--heart...........15
Religion--Catholic....
Whiskey--Brooklyn.....19
Child--New York.......18
Bitter--frost.........19
Hammer--summer........10
Thirsty--fall.........18
City--autumn..........18
Square--winter........18
Butter--daily.........19
Doctor--midnight......19
Loud--forenoon........18
Thief--afternoon......18
Lion--evening.........18
Joy--sorrow...........
Bed--obstinate........19
Heavy--indifferent....19
Tobacco--pipe.........
Baby--mother..........
Moon--daughter........18
Scissors--son.........18
Quiet--sister.........18
Queen--brother........18
Salt--forward.........19
Street--proper........19
King--vulgar..........18
Cheese--personal......15
Blossom--tree.........
Afraid--fear..........


CASE No. 17188.--G.B. Sound reactions; unclassified reactions, mostly
incoherent

Table--tablet.........10
Dark--dot.............10
Music--Lizzie.........19
Sickness--Josh........17
Man--McMahon..........10
Deep--deaf (deef).....10
Soft--sulphur.........10
Eating--itching.......10
Mountain--mouth.......10
House--horse..........10
Black--back...........10
Mutton--button........10
Comfort--community....10
Hand--hat.............10
Short--shore..........10
Fruit--Freehoff.......10
Butterfly--busty...... 3
Smooth--small......... 1
Command--Cummings.....10
Chair--cherries.......10
Sweet--sweeten........ 8
Whistle--Walters......19
Woman--wayman.........10
Cold--laboratory......19
Slow--slaw............10
Wish--wishbone........
River--Ontario........17
White--William........19
Beautiful--bureau.....10
Window--Weldon........10
Rough--saw............17
Citizen--Sendow.......17
Foot--hoof............17
Spider--web...........
Needle--shoe..........19
Red--book.............
Sleep--sitting........19
Anger--Freeman........19
Carpet--longing.......19
Girl--gone............19
High--law.............19
Working--back.........15
Sour--clock...........19
Earth--flower.........
Trouble--sensibility..17
Soldier--sodder.......10
Cabbage--Cabot........10
Hard--done............ 2
Eagle--time...........19
Stomach--mat..........19
Stem--water...........
Lamp--florist.........19
Dream--Conners........19
Yellow--flower........
Bread--water..........
Justice--Gaynor.......17
Boy--passion..........19
Light--life...........
Health--wealth........
Bible--gone...........15
Memory--Hans..........19
Sheep--pasture........
Bath--Rogan...........19
Cottage--house........
Swift--swim...........10
Blue--Thompson........19
Hungry--memory........18
Priest--golden........18
Green--hat............15
Head--broom...........19
Stove--fan............19
Long--time............
Religion--Yukon.......19
Whiskey--Freeman......15
Child--Hopkins........17
Bitter--brown.........19
Hammer--hands.........19
Thirsty--thirty.......10
City--sure............19
Square--squire........10
Butter--Tam O'Shanter.10
Doctor--Dorsan........10
Loud--law.............15
Thief--child..........19
Lion--dirty...........19
Joy--commerce.........19
Bed--strike...........19
Heavy--Walden.........19
Tobacco--Alice........19
Baby--water...........15
Moon--handsome........19
Scissors--comet.......19
Quiet--tiger..........19
Green--tree...........
Salt--salary..........10
Street--prunes........19
King--kind............19
Cheese--handsome......15
Blossom--pretty....... 1
Afraid--Africa........10



CASE No. 6238.--M.H. Sound reactions; unclassified reactions, mostly
incoherent.

Table--token..........19
Dark--dye.............17
Music--meat...........10
Sickness--sorrow......
Man--mother...........17
Jeep--dark............
Soft--silk............
Eating--elephant......19
Mountain--many........10
House--home...........
Black--brown..........
Mutton--men...........10
Comfort--cat..........10
Hand--hat.............10
Short--shift..........10
Fruit--free...........10
Butterfly--baby.......19
Smooth--soft..........
Command--cat..........10
Chair--comfort........
Sweet--sugar..........
Whistle--wine.........19
Woman--when...........10
Cold--cat.............15
Slow--short...........
Wish--when............12
River--Rhine..........
White--when...........10
Beautiful--baby.......
Window--wide..........
Rough--red............19
Citizen--company......19
Foot--feeling.........19
Spider--speck.........10
Needle--nothing.......18
Red--rose.............
Sleep--should.........12
Anger--after..........10
Carpet--cat...........10
Girl--God.............19
High--heaven..........
Working--will......... 2
Sour--sweet...........
Earth--eaten..........14
Trouble--tea..........10
Soldier--sailor.......
Cabbage--cobweb.......19
Hard--haven't.........12
Eagle--eaten..........15
Stomach--sat..........10
Stem--should..........12
Lamp--little..........19
Dream--did............12
Yellow--you...........10
Bread--butter.........
Justice--Jesus........10
Boy--baby.............
Light--love...........14
Health--heaven........
Bible--bitch..........19
Memory--man........... 1
Sheep--shepherd.......
Bath--both............10
Cottage--cat..........10
Swift--said...........19
Blue--bad............. 9
Hungry--haven't.......12
Priest--Pope..........
Ocean--open...........10
Head--heart...........
Stove--steel..........
Long--little..........15
Religion--right.......
Whiskey--when.........12
Child--chimney........19
Bitter--both..........19
Hammer--heart.........15
Thirsty--think........ 9
City--church..........17
Square--swift.........19
Butter--bread.........
Doctor--debtor........10
Loud--loaf............19
Thief--theatre........10
Lion--liar............10
Joy--jam..............19
Bed--broom............19
Heavy--hard...........
Tobacco--Tom..........19
Baby--brother.........17
Moon--men............. 2
Scissors--shift.......10
Quiet--quilt..........10
Green--grass..........
Salt--said............19
Street--Stevens.......10
King--kite............19
Cheese--cat...........15
Blossom--bad.......... 9
Afraid--anger.........


CASE No. 12720.--J.B. Unclassified reactions, many of which are
probably due to distraction; some stereotypy. Note on test record
states: "Influenced by sensory impressions, but gave good attention to
each stimulus word. Had some difficulty in limiting his response to
one word, but made all possible effort to comply with every
request. On one occasion he was asked to react with his eyes closed,
but was unable, under the unnatural conditions, to respond with one
word."

Table--floor..........
Dark--light...........
Music--shoe...........19
Sickness--well........
Man--boy..............
Deep--sea.............
Soft--soap............
Eating--tea...........17
Mountain--forest......17
House--horse..........10
Black--sill...........19
Mutton--tablecloth....17
Comfort--black........16
Hand--fingers.........
Short--wrist..........13
Fruit--soup...........17
Butterfly--grape......13
Smooth--coat..........
Command--vest.........18
Chair--pillow.........19
Sweet--brick..........19
Whistle--knuckles.....19
Woman--wall...........19
Cold--eating..........19
Slow--swift...........
Wish--knob............19
River--pad............19
White--book...........19
Beautiful--shadow..... 6
Window--stockings.....19
Bough--stand..........19
Citizen--blue.........19
Foot--brass...........19
Spider--shoelace......19
Needle--name..........19
Red--sunlight.........19
Sleep--flag...........18
Anger--slant..........19
Carpet--rip...........19
Girl--lady............
High--stripe..........19
Working--steam........17
Sour--handkerchief....19
Earth--ground.........
Trouble--insect.......19
Soldier--army.........
Cabbage--sill.........15
Hard--washstand.......19
Eagle--blue...........15
Stomach--tap..........19
Stem--sill............15
Lamp--back............19
Dream--shadow......... 2
Yellow--blanket.......19
Bread--horizontal.....19
Justice--ink..........19
Boy--taste............19
Light--yellow.........
Health--book..........19
Bible--Joseph.........17
Memory--Joe...........18
Sheep--pillow.........19
Bath--Mott............19
Cottage--globe........19
Swift--continue.......19
Blue--notice..........19
Hungry--Josephine.....19
Priest--sixteen.......12
Ocean--flag...........15
Head--cabbage.........
Stove--rivet..........17
Long--floor...........19
Religion--priest......
Whiskey--tin..........19
Child--shadow......... 6
Bitter--black.........15
Hammer--buttons.......15
Thirsty--shadow....... 6
City--back............15
Square--oval..........
Butter--table.........
Doctor--doorway.......10
Loud--shadow.......... 6
Thief--butter.........16
Lion--difference......19
Joy--ink..............15
Bed--butter...........15
Heavy--shadow......... 6
Tobacco--wood.........13
Baby--wall............15
Moon--lightning.......17
Scissors--book........15
Quiet--yellow.........15
Green--sole...........19
Salt--ink.............15
Street--sides.........19
King--stripes.........19
Cheese--butter........
Blossom--trees........
Afraid--boy...........


CASE No. 5374.--J.F. Perseveration; some stereotypy; sound reactions;
unclassified reactions many of which are probably due to distraction.
Note on test record states: "Understood what was expected, but could
not be induced to give much attention to the stimulus words; sat
facing a window, and showed a strong tendency to merely name objects
in sight. Reaction time very short, in some cases so short that it is
doubtful if he recognized the stimulus word at all."

Table--God............19
Dark--angel...........18
Music--bird...........
Sickness--woman....... 9
Man--male.............
Deep--dove............19
Soft--dog.............19
Eating--horse.........18
Mountain--mule........18
House--dog............
Black--rabbit.........18
Mutton--hen...........18
Comfort--dog..........15
Hand--clock...........
Short--myself.........
Fruit--post...........19
Butterfly--bricks.....19
Smooth--glass.........
Command--sand.........10
Chair--leaf...........19
Sweet--wood...........19
Whistle--earth........19
Woman--grass..........14
Cold--mustard.........19
Slow--kale............19
Wish--lampsquob....... 4
River--ten............12
White--rock...........17
Beautiful--water......17
Window--scene.........
Rough--been...........12
Citizen--house........13
Foot--stable.......... 2
Spider--horse.........13
Needle--pin...........
Red--cushion..........18
Sleep--black..........13
Anger--white..........14
Carpet--vingency...... 4
Girl--noodles.........19
High--macaroni........18
Working--tomatoes.....18
Sour--asparagus.......18
Earth--oakry.......... 4
Trouble--peas.........19
Soldier--beans........18
Cabbage--greens.......
Hard--cow.............19
Eagle--robin..........
Stomach--hawk.........13
Stem--fishes..........19
Lamp--whale...........18
Dream--shark..........18
Yellow--crabs.........18
Bread--red............10
Justice--jam..........19
Boy--be............... 2
Light--girl...........13
Health--filth.........10
Bible--book...........
Memory--bad........... 1
Sheep--dat............ 4
Bath--oval............19
Cottage--nurse........19
Swift--begin..........19
Blue--joy.............19
Hungry--wonder........10
Priest--apostle.......17
Ocean--preacher.......13
Head--dead............10
Stove--store..........10
Long--lone............10
Religion--world.......19
Whiskey--whisper......10
Child--gule........... 4
Bitter--Rugby.........19
Hammer--ball..........18
Thirsty--sun..........19
City--Christ..........10
Square--Jesus.........18
Butter--Joe...........19
Doctor--John..........17
Loud--Luke............18
Thief--St. Matthew....18
Lion--lie.............10
Joy--George...........10
Bed--Beth.............10
Heavy--tither......... 4
Tobacco--iron.........13
Baby--blade...........10
Moon--stars...........
Scissors--sun.........13
Quiet--wired..........10
Green--mean...........10
Salt--Lou.............19
Street--vault.........19
King--sepulchre.......18
Cheese--Presbyterian..19
Blossom--Baptist......18
Afraid--Methodist.....18


CASE No. 1431.--A.L. Sound reactions; particles; unclassified
reactions, mostly incoherent.

Table--ammitting...... 4
Dark--cat.............
Music--hello..........12
Sickness--spelling....19
Man--then.............12
Deep--heap............10
Soft--deep............ 7
Eating--people........ 1
Mountain--striking....19
House--pat............19
Black--and............12
Mutton--it............12
Comfort--herself......12
Hand--self............19
Short--length.........
Fruit--long...........13
Butterfly--quick......19
Smooth--edges.........19
Command--first........17
Chair--exact..........19
Sweet--nicest......... 2
Whistle--thistle......10
Woman--pins...........19
Cold--waving..........19
Slow--swift...........
Wish--choice..........17
River--never..........10
White--black..........
Beautiful--much.......19
Window--such..........19
Rough--exact..........15
Citizen--just.........
Foot--root............10
Spider--diving........19
Needle--Hercules......19
Red--green............
Sleep--deep...........
Anger--grief..........
Carpet--cheap.........19
Girl--ink.............19
High--I...............10
Working--loafing......
Sour--hour............10
Earth--hurt...........10
Trouble--bubble.......10
Soldier--yes..........12
Cabbage--garbage......10
Hard--hitting.........17
Eagle--fitting........19
Stomach--pitting......19
Stem--condemned.......10
Lamp--stamp...........10
Dream--stained........19
Yellow--purple........
Bread--pimple.........19
Justice--suit.........17
Boy--ahoy.............12
Light--night..........
Health--wealth........
Bible--indeed.........12
Memory--remembering...
Sheep--cow............
Bath--sponge..........
Cottage--people....... 1
Swift--left...........10
Blue--shift...........19
Hungry--property......19
Priest--judge......... 2
Ocean--river..........
Head--sea.............13
Stove--Venus..........19
Long--hog.............19
Religion--pigeon......10
Whiskey--gin..........
Child--thing..........19
Bitter--better........10
Hammer--happy......... 9
Thirsty--whiskey......17
City--fitting.........10
Square--round.........
Butter--shut..........10
Doctor--exercise......19
Loud--accounts........10
Thief--endless........19
Lion--tiger...........
Joy--fast.............19
Bed--grass............19
Heavy--heaving........10
Tobacco--queen........19
Baby--water...........19
Moon--room............19
Scissors--pants.......17
Quiet--razor..........13
Green--steel..........18
Salt--sharp...........
Street--fence.........19
King--bring...........10
Cheese--eggs..........
Blossom--see..........19
Afraid--awaiting......19


CASE No. 6251.--C.D. Some stereotypy; particles; unclassified
reactions, mostly incoherent.

Table--doctor.........19
Dark--nigger..........17
Music--violin.........
Sickness--whores......19
Man--Mulcane..........17
Deep--deaf............19
Soft--hearing.........18
Eating--pillow........13
Mountain--sight.......19
House--pure...........19
Black--nigger.........
Mutton--plenty........ 6
Comfort--middle.......19
Hand--left............17
Short--one............12
Fruit--up.............12
Butterfly--bird.......
Smooth--never......... 6
Command--commodore....10
Chair--seat...........
Sweet--sugar..........
Whistle--highest......19
Woman--Constance......17
Cold--temperature.....
Slow--walk............
Wish--wishbone........
River--love...........19
White--Dr. White......17
Beautiful--pretty..... 1
Window--dove..........19
Rough--fine........... 1
Citizen--United States
Foot--left............15
Spider--web...........
Needle--ether.........19
Red--pot..............
Sleep--wake...........
Anger--mad............
Carpet--pretty........ 1
Girl--boy.............
High--Heidel..........10
Working--never........
Sour--sweet...........
Earth--bride..........19
Trouble--mischief.....
Soldier--war..........
Cabbage--head.........
Hard--never........... 6
Eagle--fly............
Stomach--go...........19
Stem--study...........10
Lamp--light...........
Dream--behave.........19
Yellow--false.........19
Bread--plenty......... 6
Justice--just.........
Boy--come.............19
Light--Davie..........19
Health--wealth........
Bible--Constance......15
Memory--fine.......... 1
Sheep--plenty......... 6
Bath--bother..........10
Cottage--mansion......
Swift--hurry..........
Blue--flowers......... 2
Hungry--never.........
Priest--highest....... 2
Ocean--land...........
Head--millionaire.....19
Stove--twenty-five....12
Long--thirty-four.....12
Religion--churches....
Whiskey--plenty....... 6
Child--baby...........
Bitter--sorrow........
Hammer--court.........19
Thirsty--blood........11
City--this............12
Square--I.............12
Butter--plenty........ 6
Doctor--millionaire...15
Loud--tell............17
Thief--rich...........19
Lion--west............19
Joy--ever.............12
Bed--Constance........15
Heavy--fine........... 9
Tobacco--back.........10
Baby--millionaire.....15
Moon--always..........12
Scissors--large....... 9
Quiet--stay...........19
Green--flowers........
Salt--perfume.........18
Street--floor.........19
King--Haaken..........19
Cheese--kiss..........19
Blossom--flower.......
Afraid--never.........


CASE No. 17607.--P.D. Test record somewhat approaching the normal: 24
individual reactions, of which 16 are unclassified, mostly "far
fetched" and not strictly incoherent. Patient is a well-marked case of
dementia præcox but only moderately deteriorated; works well at the
hospital.

Table--oak..............
Dark--brown.............
Music--falsetto.........17
Sickness--typhoid.......
Man--gender.............19
Deep--feet..............19
Soft--feeling...........
Eating--partaking.......19
Mountain--hunter........19
House--dwelling.........
Black--color............
Mutton--sheep...........
Comfort--coziness....... 2
Hand--anatomy...........
Short--stature..........
Fruit--apples...........
Butterfly--insect.......
Smooth--plain...........
Command--order..........
Chair--furniture........
Sweet--sugar............
Whistle--steam..........
Woman--sex..............
Cold--degree............
Slow--speedless.........
Wish--expression........
River--Amazon...........
White--pulp.............17
Beautiful--description..
Window--opaque..........19
Rough--uncouth..........
Citizen--qualification..19
Foot--anatomy...........
Spider--bug.............
Needle--steel...........
Red--color..............
Sleep--slumber..........
Anger--aroused..........
Carpet--texture......... 2
Girl--female............
High--up................
Working--doing..........
Sour--lemon.............
Earth--dirt.............
Trouble--distress.......
Soldier--uniform........
Cabbage--crop...........19
Hard--metal.............
Eagle--bird.............
Stomach--anatomy........
Stem--pipe..............
Lamp--glass.............
Dream--atmosphere.......19
Yellow--color...........
Bread--flour............
Justice--equality.......
Boy--male...............
Light--sun..............
Health--color...........
Bible--nonsense.........19
Memory--retentiveness... 2
Sheep--quadruped........
Bath--water.............
Cottage--stories........19
Swift--speed............
Blue--navy..............
Hungry--appetite........
Priest--uniform.........15
Ocean--Atlantic.........
Head--stature...........15
Stove--iron.............
Long--inches............17
Religion--creed.........
Whiskey--hops...........
Child--neuter...........19
Bitter--horehound.......17
Hammer--steel...........
Thirsty--degree.........15
City--population........
Square--sides...........
Butter--cream...........
Doctor--physician.......
Loud--noise.............
Thief--characterization.19
Lion--menagerie.........
Joy--openness...........19
Bed--furniture..........
Heavy--weight...........
Tobacco--plant..........
Baby--egg...............19
Moon--astronomy.........
Scissors--blades........
Quiet--noiseless........
Green--Paris............11
Salt--crystal...........17
Street--lane............
King--usurper...........19
Cheese--milk............
Blossom--bud............
Afraid--scared..........


CASE No. 5537.--J.H. Test record approaching the normal: 21
individual reactions, 8 classed as normal, 1 non-specific, 12
unclassified, mostly "far fetched" but not strictly incoherent.
Well-marked dementia præcox, but of recent origin and but slight
deterioration.

Table--eat............
Dark--night...........
Music--pleasure....... 1
Sickness--suffering...
Man--farmer...........17
Deep--low.............
Soft--hard............
Eating--life..........
Mountain--earth.......
House--dwelling.......
Black--color..........
Mutton--food..........
Comfort--rest.........
Hand--limb............
Short--small.......... 1
Fruit--nourishing.....
Butterfly--flower.....

Smooth--straight......
Command--obey.........
Chair--furniture......
Sweet--palate......... 8
Whistle--noise........
Woman--marriage.......
Cold--indisposed......17
Slow--weary...........19
Wish--work............ 9
River--tug............
White--sheets......... 2
Beautiful--rare.......19
Window--ventilation...
Rough--uneven.........
Citizen--public.......17
Foot--walk............
Spider--web...........
Needle--sew...........
Red--marine........... 1
Sleep--repose.........
Anger--assault........17
Carpet--cloth.........
Girl--sister..........
High--above...........
Working--labor........
Sour--bitter..........
Earth--farm...........
Trouble--fight........
Soldier--duty.........
Cabbage--vegetable....
Hard--stone...........
Eagle--large.......... 1
Stomach--body.........
Stem--leaf............
Lamp--light...........
Dream--unconsciousness
Yellow--flag..........
Bread--hunger.........
Justice--freedom......
Boy--school...........
Light--electricity....
Health--business......19
Bible--religion.......
Memory--brain.........
Sheep--pasture........
Bath--clean...........
Cottage--property.....17
Swift--current........
Blue--uniform.........17
Hungry--appetite......
Priest--church........
Ocean--commerce.......19
Head--thought......... 1
Stove--iron...........
Long--distance........
Religion--belief......
Whiskey--alcohol......
Child--parent.........
Bitter--taste.........
Hammer--trade.........19
Thirsty--beverage.....
City--position........19
Square--block.........
Butter--yellow........
Doctor--profession....
Loud--fiddle..........17
Thief--police.........
Lion--Africa..........
Joy--sensation........
Bed--rest.............
Heavy--burden.........
Tobacco--store........19
Baby--care............
Moon--atmosphere......
Scissors--dressmaker..
Quiet--lonesome.......
Green--color..........
Salt--house...........19
Street--neighborhood..17
King--beast...........19
Cheese--merchant......19
Blossom--flowers......
Afraid--train.........10


CASE No. 6190.--L.L. Test record not distinguishable from normal.
Case of recent onset, with little, if any deterioration.

Table--chair..........
Dark--light...........
Music--note...........
Sickness--health......
Man--woman............ 1
Deep--shallow.........
Soft--hard............
Eating--breakfast.....
Mountain--rock........
House--chimney........
Black--white..........
Mutton--animal........
Comfort--chair........
Hand--foot............
Short--long...........
Fruit--ripe...........
Butterfly--fields.....
Smooth--hard..........
Command--army.........
Chair--straw..........19
Sweet--bitter.........
Whistle--engine.......
Woman--man............ 1
Cold--hot.............
Slow--fast............
Wish--desire..........
River--brook..........
White--black..........
Beautiful--girl.......
Window--glass.........
Rough--smooth.........
Citizen--city.........
Foot--ankle...........
Spider--web...........
Needle--cotton........
Red--brick............
Sleep--night..........
Anger--joy............
Carpet--cloth.........
Girl--mouth...........17
High--low.............
Working--idle.........
Sour--vinegar.........
Earth--round..........
Trouble--sickness.....
Soldier--gun..........
Cabbage--garden.......
Hard--rock............
Eagle--fly............
Stomach--man.......... 1
Stem--watch...........
Lamp--oil.............
Dream--sleep..........
Yellow--sunflower.....
Bread--butter.........
Justice--peace........
Boy--girl.............
Light--window.........
Health--man........... 1
Bible--God............
Memory--mind..........
Sheep--pasture........
Bath--water...........
Cottage--trees........
Swift--engine.........
Blue--sky.............
Hungry--bread.........
Priest--church........
Ocean--ships..........
Head--mind............
Stove--chimney........
Long--wind............19
Religion--God.........
Whiskey--alcohol......
Child--mother.........
Bitter--fruit.........
Hammer--nails.........
Thirsty--water........
City--cars............
Square--angles........
Butter--cow...........
Doctor--sickness......
Loud--noise...........
Thief--sinner......... 2
Lion--jungle..........
Joy--gladness.........
Bed--pillow...........
Heavy--iron...........
Tobacco--leaf.........
Baby--mother..........
Moon--stars...........
Scissors--thread......
Quiet--room...........
Green--grass..........
Salt--ocean...........
Street--men...........15
King--queen...........
Cheese--butter........
Blossom--bud..........
Afraid--coward........


CASE No. 1278.--B.B. Test record not distinguishable from normal.
Case of several years standing, but showing almost complete remission
of all symptoms.

Table--chair..........
Dark--day.............
Music--instrument.....
Sickness--health......
Man--woman............ 1
Deep--thoughts........ 1
Soft--apple...........
Eating--food..........
Mountain--rock........
House--building.......
Black--dark...........
Mutton--meat..........
Comfort--home.........
Hand--from............12
Short--stout..........
Fruit--eating.........
Butterfly--bird.......
Smooth--glossy........
Command--general......
Chair--floor..........
Sweet--taste..........
Whistle--tune.........
Woman--man............ 1
Cold--chilly..........
Slow--fast............
Wish--something.......
River--water..........
White--black..........
Beautiful--pretty.....
Window--pane..........
Rough--ugly...........
Citizen--papers.......
Foot--shoe............
Spider--bug...........
Needle--thread........
Red--white............
Sleep--slumber........
Anger--kindness.......
Carpet--mat...........
Girl--boy.............
High--short...........
Working--idle.........
Sour--sweet...........
Earth--land...........
Trouble--sorrow.......
Soldier--hero.........
Cabbage--turnip.......
Hard--soft............
Eagle--owl............
Stomach--head.........
Stem--pipe............
Lamp--cover...........19
Dream--sleep..........
Yellow--brown.........
Bread--biscuit........
Justice--peaceful..... 2
Boy--girl.............
Light--dark...........
Health--well..........
Bible--book...........
Memory--lost.......... 2
Sheep--animal.........
Bath--wash............
Cottage--house........
Swift--movements...... 2
Blue--red.............
Hungry--thirst........
Priest--minister......
Ocean--sea............
Head--body............
Stove--iron...........
Long--length..........
Religion--too.........12
Whiskey--drink........
Child--baby...........
Bitter--taste.........
Hammer--nails.........
Thirsty--drink........
City--town............
Square--man........... 1
Butter--bread.........
Doctor--patient.......
Loud--howl............17
Thief--steal..........
Lion--bear............
Joy--happiness........ 1
Bed--blanket..........
Heavy--weight.........
Tobacco--smoke........
Baby--cradle..........
Moon--sun.............
Scissors--thimble.....
Quiet--stillness......
Green--plaid..........17
Salt--pepper..........
Street--sidewalk......
King--queen...........
Cheese--crackers......
Blossom--leaf.........
Afraid--frightened....


PARANOIC CONDITIONS.

The clinical group of psychoses included under the designation
paranoic conditions is far from being homogeneous. We have here cases
that are more or less closely allied to the paranoid form of dementia
præcox, other cases that are apparently dependent upon involutional
changes (Kraepelin's _praeseniler Beeinträchtigungswah_), still
other cases that are characterized by absence or at least delay of
mental deterioration, etc.

In some of these cases disturbance of the flow of utterance is not
observed, and the test records obtained from them present no striking
abnormalities. Distinctly pathological records are obtained mainly
from those cases which clinically resemble dementia præcox; in these
records the nature of the pathological reactions would seem to
indicate that the diagnosis of dementia præcox would be more
justifiable than that of paranoic condition.

The following test records will serve to illustrate the types of
reactions met with in this group of psychoses:


CASE No. 3039.--F.A. Normal record.

Table--purpose........19
Dark--obscure.........
Music--pleasant....... 1
Sickness--confinement.17
Man--twenty-one.......12
Deep--down............
Soft--smooth..........
Eating--nourishment...
Mountain--high........
House--living.........
Black--dark...........
Mutton--eating........
Comfort--pleasant..... 1
Hand--limb............
Short--low............
Fruit--eat............
Butterfly--miller.....
Smooth--soft..........
Command--obey.........
Chair--sitting........
Sweet--tasting........
Whistle--noise........
Woman--female.........
Cold--unpleasant...... 1
Slow--easy............
Wish--want............
River--water..........
White--colorless......
Beautiful--handsome...
Window--glass.........
Rough--unpleasant..... 1
Citizen--vote.........
Foot--limb............
Spider--insect........
Needle--sewing........
Red--color............
Sleep--bed............
Anger--cross..........
Carpet--floor.........
Girl--young...........
High--up..............
Working--labor........
Sour--unpleasant...... 1
Earth--dirt...........
Trouble--worriment....
Soldier--fight........
Cabbage--vegetable....
Hard--tough...........
Eagle--bird...........
Stomach--anatomy......

Stem--growth..........
Lamp--burn............
Dream--restlessness...
Yellow--color.........
Bread--eat............
Justice--right........
Boy--young............
Light--see............
Health--well..........
Bible--religion.......
Memory--thoughtful....
Sheep--animal.........
Bath--wash............
Cottage--house........
Swift--fast...........
Blue--color...........
Hungry--appetite......
Priest--Christian.....17
Ocean--large..........
Head--trunk...........
Stove--fire...........
Long--distance........
Religion--Christianity
Whiskey--drinkable....
Child--young..........
Bitter--bad...........
Hammer--knock.........
Thirsty--dry..........
City--government......
Square--block.........
Butter--eat...........
Doctor--cure..........
Loud--noisy...........
Thief--steal..........
Lion--animal..........
Joy--pleasant.........
Bed--laying...........
Heavy--weighty........
Tobacco--smoking......
Baby--new-born........
Moon--planet..........
Scissors--cutting.....
Quiet--easy...........
Green--color..........
Salt--preservative....
Street--lane..........
King--monarch.........
Cheese--eatable.......
Blossom--budding......
Afraid--fear..........


CASE No. 5803.--D.E.D. Slight tendency to give sound reactions.

Table--tree...........19
Dark--bright..........
Music--song...........
Sickness--health......
Man--woman............ 1
Deep--shallow.........
Soft--hard............
Eating--digesting.....
Mountain--hill........
House--horse..........10
Black--red............
Mutton--tallow........
Comfort--wealth.......
Hand--arm.............
Short--long...........
Fruit--plate..........17
Butterfly--net........
Smooth--surface.......
Command--obey.........
Chair--table..........
Sweet--sour...........
Whistle--call.........
Woman--lady...........
Cold--lukewarm........19
Slow--not.............12
Wish--receive.........
River--lake...........
White--black..........
Beautiful--graceful...
Window--door..........
Rough--smooth.........
Citizen--city.........
Foot--leg.............
Spider--soap..........10
Needle--pin...........
Red--yellow...........
Sleep--slumber........
Anger--amiable........
Carpet--mat...........
Girl--boy.............
High--hill............
Working--playing......
Sour--sweet...........
Earth--land...........
Trouble--tranquillity.10
Soldier--boy..........
Cabbage--plant........
Hard--easy............
Eagle--bird...........
Stomach--bowels.......
Stem--head............
Lamp--chimney.........
Dream--myth...........17
Yellow--blue..........
Bread--biscuit........
Justice--balance......17
Boy--girl.............
Light--gray...........17
Health--wealth........
Bible--prayerbook.....
Memory--understanding.
Sheep--lamb...........
Bath--swim............
Cottage--house........
Swift--slow...........
Blue--yellow..........
Hungry--eat...........
Priest--bishop........
Ocean--river..........
Head--neck............
Stove--covers.........
Long--short...........
Religion--optional....
Whiskey--wine.........
Child--baby...........
Bitter--sweet.........
Hammer--gimlet........
Thirsty--drink........
City--town............
Square--compass.......
Butter--butterfly.....
Doctor--lawyer........
Loud--lord............
Thief--beggar.........
Lion--lioness.........
Joy--sorrow...........
Bed--couch............
Heavy--light..........
Tobacco--cigarette....
Baby--child...........
Moon--stars...........
Scissors--knife.......
Quiet--quilt..........
Green--envy...........
Salt--sewing..........
Street--lane..........
King--queen...........
Cheese--cracker.......
Blossom--flower.......
Afraid--courageous....


CASE No. 2133.--M.F. Unclassified reactions, mostly "far fetched" or
incoherent; perseveration.

Table--eat............
Dark--night...........
Music--sing...........
Sickness--sadness.....
Man--home.............
Deep--light...........
Soft--sleep...........13
Eating--drink.........
Mountain--hills.......
House--home...........
Black--stove..........17
Mutton--lamb..........
Comfort--pleasure..... 1
Hand--write...........
Short--short-cake.....10
Fruit--grapes.........
Butterfly--butter.....
Smooth--ironing.......
Command--correct......19
Chair--see............19
Sweet--apples.........
Whistle--happiness.... 1
Woman--girl...........
Cold--warm............
Slow--fast............
Wish--like............
River--water..........
White--blue...........
Beautiful--red........13
Window--light.........
Rough--easy...........
Citizen--spring.......19
Foot--run.............
Spider--fly...........
Needle--Carrie........19
Red--pink.............
Sleep--awake..........
Anger--jolly..........19
Carpet--curtains......
Girl--yellow..........19
High--green...........14
Working--bed..........19
Sour--dishes..........19
Earth--grapes.........13
Trouble--work......... 1
Soldier--sing.........15
Cabbage--potatoes.....
Hard--sewing..........17
Eagle--daisy..........19
Stomach--flowers......18
Stem--vine............
Lamp--flatiron........19
Dream--sleep..........
Yellow--awake.........13
Bread--children.......
Justice--dresses......14
Boy--mother...........
Light--dark...........
Health--wealth........
Bible--commands....... 2
Memory--black.........13
Sheep--chickens.......17
Bath--carpet..........19
Cottage--worsted......14
Swift--silk...........18
Blue--cotton..........18
Hungry--chair.........19
Priest--church........
Ocean--spring.........15
Head--canary..........19
Stove--board..........
Long--dishes..........18
Religion--piano.......19
Whiskey--home.........15
Child--baby...........
Bitter--shoes.........19
Hammer--tacks.........
Thirsty--longing......
City--Flushing........17
Square--store.........10
Butter--butcher.......10
Doctor--hat...........19
Loud--chair...........15
Thief--picture........19
Lion--house...........13
Joy--gladness.........
Bed--sleep............
Heavy--sick........... 2
Tobacco--album........19
Baby--basket..........17
Moon--stars...........
Scissors--knife.......
Quiet--spoon..........18
Green--scar...........19
Salt--pepper..........
Street--sugar.........18
King--blacking........19
Cheese--meat..........
Blossom--flowers......
Afraid--red...........18


CASE No. 4569.--L.K. Marked stereotypy; unclassified reactions,
mostly incoherent.

Table--fruit..........17
Dark--light...........
Music--pleasure....... 1
Sickness--illness.....
Man--parent........... 6
Deep--verse...........19
Soft--fruit...........
Eating--illness.......15
Mountain--parent...... 6
House--privilege......19
Black--colors......... 2
Mutton--parent........ 6
Comfort--family.......18
Hand--comfort......... 7
Short--parent......... 6
Fruit--parent......... 5
Butterfly--insect.....
Smooth--surface.......
Command--privilege....15
Chair--house..........
Sweet--dairy..........19
Whistle--nature.......19
Woman--parent......... 6
Cold--house........... 6
Slow--light...........15
Wish--desire..........
River--house.......... 6
White--suspicion......19
Beautiful--house...... 6
Window--light.........
Rough--surface........
Citizen--parent....... 6
Foot--house...........
Spider--insect........
Needle--house......... 6
Red--colors...........
Sleep--God............ 6
Anger--God............ 5
Carpet--house.........
Girl--God............. 6
High--house...........
Working--parent....... 6
Sour--desire..........15
Earth--God............ 6
Trouble--God.......... 5
Soldier--house........ 6
Cabbage--desire.......15
Hard--vegetable.......
Eagle--animal.........
Stomach--doctor.......
Stem--growth..........
Lamp--house...........
Dream--God............ 6
Yellow--color.........
Bread--God............ 6
Justice--fright.......19
Boy--parent........... 6
Light--God............ 6
Health--God........... 5
Bible--teachings......
Memory--teaching...... 2
Sheep--God............ 6
Bath--cleanness.......
Cottage--home.........
Swift--fear...........19
Blue--color...........
Hungry--appetite......
Priest--servant.......
Ocean--God............ 6
Head--servant......... 6
Stove--house..........
Long--God............. 6
Religion--servant..... 6
Whiskey--doctor.......15
Child--house.......... 6
Bitter--taste.........
Hammer--household.....19
Thirsty--drink........
City--God............. 6
Square--touch.........19
Butter--taste.........
Doctor--servant....... 6
Loud--thought......... 9
Thief--slave..........19
Lion--animal..........
Joy--pleasure......... 1
Bed--household........15
Heavy--weight.........
Tobacco--doctor.......15
Baby--care............
Moon--heavens.........
Scissors--household...15
Quiet--nerve..........19
Green--substance......19
Salt--taste...........
Street--heavens.......15
King--servant......... 6
Cheese--taste.........
Blossom--sight........
Afraid--fear..........


CASE No. 6164.--L.E. Remarkably persistent tendency to give sound
reactions; numerous sound neologisms; no reactions given in response
to some of the stimulus words on the ground that she had "no word to
match."

Table--witchhazel.....10
Dark--frog............19
Music--lessons........ 2
Sickness--badness..... 2
Man--wife.............
Deep--seef............ 4
Soft--shoft........... 3
Eating--feeding.......
Mountain--sounding....10
House--shmouse........ 3
Black--fake...........19
Mutton--shutton....... 3
Comfort--somfort...... 3
Hand--land............10
Short--court..........10
Fruit--shrewd.........10
Butterfly--shuddergy.. 3
Smooth--slude......... 3
Command--noman........ 3
Chair--sash...........19
Sweet--leaf...........19
Whistle--noshissel.... 3
Woman--lemon..........19
Cold--shoal...........10
Slow--snow............10
Wish--dish............
River--liberty........10
White--size...........10
Beautiful--...........
Window--Hilda.........19
Rough--shoff.......... 3
Citizen--shiffizen.... 3
Foot--shoot...........10
Spider--shider........ 3
Needle--dreedle....... 3
Red--shred............10
Sleep--seef........... 3
Anger--...............
Carpet--shloppet...... 3
Girl--shirl........... 3
High--fie.............10
Working--shlirking.... 3
Sour--bower...........10
Earth--world..........
Trouble--shuttle......19
Soldier--polster...... 3
Cabbage--sheffies..... 4
Hard--shward.......... 3
Eagle--...............
Stomach--.............
Stem--lamp............19
Lamp--sant............ 4
Dream--leam........... 3
Yellow--cherry........19
Bread--dread..........10
Justice--chestnuts....10
Boy--.................
Light--shwife......... 3
Health--felt.......... 2
Bible--...............
Memory--..............
Sheep--sheet..........10
Bath--scab............19
Cottage--foppach...... 3
Swift--shift..........10
Blue--shoe............10
Hungry--angry.........
Priest--sheaf.........19
Ocean--notion.........10
Head--shred...........10
Stove--shove.......... 3
Long--song............10
Religion--switching...19
Whiskey--chiston...... 4
Child--kile........... 3
Bitter--shitter....... 3
Hammer--lemon.........13
Thirsty--flrsten...... 3
City--................
Square--birds.........19
Butter--shudder.......10
Doctor--shoctor....... 3
Loud--souse...........10
Thief--sheaf..........10
Lion--Zion............10
Joy--bloy............. 3
Bed--wading...........19
Heavy--shleavy........ 3
Tobacco--confecker.... 4
Baby--savey........... 3
Moon--shoon........... 3
Scissors--............
Quiet--shiet.......... 3
Green--sheel.......... 4
Salt--shawlt.......... 3
Street--freet......... 3
King--sing............10
Cheese--seefs......... 4
Blossom--pleasant..... 9
Afraid--shraid........ 3


CASE No. 3606.--F.W. Neologisms; some particles; many unclassified
reactions, mostly incoherent.

Table--pleasure....... 9
Dark--air.............19
Music--walking........19
Sickness--gloves......19
Man--fields...........19
Deep--courtesy........19
Soft--spoons..........19
Eating--oranges.......
Mountain--ice.........17
House--paintings...... 2
Black--blue...........
Mutton--hemisphere....19
Comfort--flowers......19
Hand--sawdust.........19
Short--peanuts........19
Fruit--autoharp.......19
Butterfly--disease....19
Smooth--ice...........
Command--botheration..19
Chair--tea............19
Sweet--arrangement....19
Whistle--steadfast....19
Woman--flowers........15
Cold--grandeur........19
Slow--present.........19
Wish--mania...........19
River--courtesy.......15
White--ink............17
Beautiful--flowers....
Window--air...........
Rough--enjoyment......19
Citizen--queer........19
Foot--hatred..........19
Spider--carousy....... 4
Needle--pleasant...... 9
Red--permit...........19
Sleep--indeed.........12
Anger--benevolence....19
Carpet--disorder......19
Girl--caterer.........19
High--aside...........10
Working--among........12
Sour--destroy.........19
Earth--confusion......19
Trouble--frivolous....19
Soldier--air..........15
Cabbage--temptation...19
Hard--among...........12
Eagle--quality........19
Stomach--debasteaur... 4
Stem--counteract......19
Lamp--testament.......19
Dream--connexus....... 4
Yellow--division......19
Bread--atherey........ 4
Justice--anger........19
Boy--quality..........15
Light--among..........12
Health--frivolous.....15
Bible--permit.........15
Memory--usual.........19
Sheep--astray.........
Bath--conscientious...19
Cottage--texalous..... 4
Swift--patience.......19
Blue--community.......19
Hungry--confusion.....15
Priest--second........19
Ocean--apology........19
Head--trinity.........19
Stove--compartment....19
Long--terminal........19
Religion--abundant....19
Whiskey--approvement.. 4
Child--anger..........15
Bitter--courageous....19
Hammer--correction....19
Thirsty--afterwards...12
City--cataract........19
Square--plenty........19
Butter--accost........19
Doctor--southern......19
Loud--triangular......19
Thief--cannery........19
Lion--practice........19
Joy--summons..........19
Bed--avron............ 4
Heavy--olenthegolis... 4
Tobacco--abundant.....15
Baby--parenthus....... 4
Moon--otherwise.......12
Scissors--cartridge...19
Quiet--outside........12
Green--abounty........ 4
Salt--calonry......... 4
Street--abyss.........19
King--cavenry......... 4
Cheese--perplex.......19
Blossom--cartridge....15
Afraid--stubborn......19


EPILEPSY.

Most of the cases of epilepsy in our collection show advanced dementia
and in some the clinical history would indicate also original mental
inferiority, that is to say, imbecility or feeble-mindedness.

In these cases the dominant characteristic, so far as shown in the
test records, seems to be a narrowing of the mental horizon manifested
firstly by a tendency to repeat many times one or another word, and
secondly by an abnormally pronounced tendency to make use of
non-specific reactions or particles of speech. Occasionally other
abnormalities are noted, such as perseveration or distraction.

We submit here copies of some test records.


CASE No. 5410.--W.T.K. Repetition of words previously given;
nonspecific reactions.

Table--article........ 1
Dark--light...........
Music--tone...........
Sickness--ill.........
Man--person........... 1
Deep--distant......... 2
Soft--condition....... 6
Eating--chew..........
Mountain--high........
House--abode..........
Black--color..........
Mutton--meat..........
Comfort--peace........
Hand--limb............
Short--distance.......
Fruit--result.........
Butterfly--animal.....
Smooth--plain.........
Command--order........
Chair--seat...........
Sweet--pleasant....... 1
Whistle--sound........
Woman--female.........
Cold--chilly..........
Slow--pace............
Wish--desire..........
River--body...........
White--clear..........
Beautiful--grand......
Window--place.........13
Rough--unsmooth....... 4
Citizen--member.......
Foot--member..........
Spider--animal........
Needle--article....... 1
Bed--color............
Sleep--rest...........
Anger--condition...... 6
Carpet--covering......
Girl--female..........
High--distance........
Working--occupation...
Sour--condition....... 6
Earth--planet.........
Trouble--condition.... 6
Soldier--member....... 6
Cabbage--vegetable....
Hard--condition....... 6
Eagle--animal.........
Stomach--member.......
Stem--branch..........
Lamp--article......... 1
Dream--thinking....... 1
Yellow--shade.........
Bread--article........ 6
Justice--position.....19
Boy--male.............
Light--clear..........
Health--condition.....
Bible--book...........
Memory--condition..... 6
Sheep--animal.........
Bath--position........15
Cottage--house........
Swift--fast...........
Blue--color...........
Hungry--condition..... 6
Priest--office........
Ocean--body...........
Head--member..........
Stove--article........ 1
Long--distance........
Religion--profession..
Whiskey--liquid.......
Child--person......... 1
Bitter--condition..... 6
Hammer--article....... 1
Thirsty--condition.... 6
City--place...........
Square--honest........
Butter--article....... 6
Doctor--profession....
Loud--sound...........
Thief--position.......15
Lion--animal..........
Joy--pleasant......... 1
Bed--article.......... 6
Heavy--weight.........
Tobacco--plant........
Baby--person.......... 1
Moon--planet..........
Scissors--article..... 1
Quiet--peaceful.......
Green--shade..........
Salt--article......... 1
Street--place.........
King--ruler...........
Cheese--article....... 6
Blossom--plant........
Afraid--fear..........


CASE No. 2208.--J.A. Repetition of words previously given;
non-specific reactions.

Table--wood...........
Dark--chairs..........13
Music--wood...........14
Sickness--dropsy......17
Man--body.............
Deep--well............
Soft--lady............19
Eating--man........... 6
Mountain--hills.......
House--barns.......... 2
Black--horse..........
Mutton--sheep.........
Comfort--poison.......19
Hand--man............. 1
Short--people......... 1
Fruit--trees..........
Butterfly--tree.......
Smooth--people........ 6
Command--general......
Chair--hands..........16
Sweet--fruit..........
Whistle--man.......... 1
Woman--people......... 1
Cold--ice.............
Slow--people.......... 6
Wish--dead............19
River--lakes..........
White--foam...........17
Beautiful--man........ 1
Window--glass.........
Rough--people......... 6
Citizen--man.......... 1
Foot--people.......... 6
Spider--barn..........15
Needle--clothes.......
Red--blood............
Sleep--bed............
Anger--angry..........
Carpet--stores........19
Girl--ladies.......... 2
High--mountain........
Working--people....... 6
Sour--fruit...........
Earth--clay...........
Trouble--bad.......... 1
Soldier--man.......... 1
Cabbage--field........
Hard--case............19
Eagle--bird...........
Stomach--man.......... 1
Stem--pipe............
Lamp--fire............
Dream--bad............ 1
Yellow--chair.........15
Bread--rye............
Justice--right........
Boy--bad.............. 1
Light--ship...........19
Health--pig...........19
Bible--man............ 6
Memory--mind..........
Sheep--mutton.........
Bath--water...........
Cottage--house........
Swift--ship...........15
Blue--lines...........17
Hungry--people........ 6
Priest--man........... 1
Ocean--deep...........
Head--bad............. 9
Stove--wood...........
Long--trees........... 2
Religion--form........19
Whiskey--apples.......17
Child--people......... 1
Bitter--apples........
Hammer--axe...........
Thirsty--drink........
City--towns...........

Square--measurement...
Butter--cows..........
Doctor--person........ 1
Loud--people.......... 1
Thief--person......... 1
Lion--animal..........
Joy--person........... 9
Bed--man.............. 6
Heavy--mountain.......
Tobacco--growing......
Baby--person.......... 1
Moon--people.......... 6
Scissors--cutting.....
Quiet--mind...........
Green--cloud..........19
Salt--planting........13
Street--walk..........
King--human...........19
Cheese--milk..........
Blossom--flowers......
Afraid--human.........15


CASE No. 01218.--E.M. Repetition of words previously given;
non-specific reactions.

Table--tablecloth.....
Dark--dog.............
Music--figure.........17
Sickness--drink.......17
Man--people........... 1
Deep--pull............19
Soft--light...........
Eating--think......... 1
Mountain--well........13
House--plumber........17
Black--horse..........
Mutton--park..........19
Comfort--nice......... 1
Hand--use............. 1
Short--long...........
Fruit--figs...........
Butterfly--cloth......19
Smooth--nice.......... 1
Command--pleasant..... 6
Chair--wash...........19
Sweet--sour...........
Whistle--mug..........19
Woman--pear...........19
Cold--warm............
Slow--quickness.......
Wish--nice............ 1
River--pleasant....... 1
White--use............ 6
Beautiful--comfort....19
Window--looks......... 2
Rough--pleasant....... 6
Citizen--comfort......15
Foot--help............
Spider--wake..........19
Needle--use........... 1
Red--look.............15
Sleep--good........... 1
Anger--no.............12
Carpet--make..........19
Girl--happy........... 9
High--nice............ 6
Working--pleasant..... 1
Sour--bag.............19
Earth--ground.........
Trouble--good......... 6
Soldier--clothes......
Cabbage--eat..........
Hard--good............ 1
Eagle--pleasant....... 6
Stomach--hurt.........
Stem--use............. 1
Lamp--lighted.........
Dream--pleasant....... 1
Yellow--wake..........15
Bread--making.........
Justice--help.........
Boy--pleasant......... 6
Light--big............19
Health--nice.......... 6
Bible--use............ 1
Memory--no............12
Sheep--pleasant....... 1
Bath--good............ 6
Cottage--useful.......
Swift--quick..........
Blue--good............ 1
Hungry--sour..........15
Priest--good.......... 1
Ocean--useful......... 6
Head--nice............ 6
Stove--lighted........ 2
Long--lake............19
Religion--pleasant.... 6
Whiskey--use.......... 6
Child--help........... 6
Bitter--sour..........
Hammer--stick.........19
Thirsty--drink........
City--handy...........19
Square--pleasant...... 6
Butter--useful........ 1
Doctor--help..........
Loud--make............15
Thief--punish......... 2
Lion--bad............. 9
Joy--happy............ 1
Bed--pleasant......... 1
Heavy--light..........
Tobacco--pleasant..... 1
Baby--help............ 6
Moon--sun.............
Scissors--pleasant.... 6
Quiet--sleep..........
Green--beans..........10
Salt--handy...........15
Street--make..........15
King--nice............ 6
Cheese--good.......... 1
Blossom--pleasant..... 1
Afraid--will..........19


CASE No. 4989.--C.H. Repetition of words previously given;
non-specific reactions; particles.

Table--work........... 1
Dark--true............19
Music--pleasant....... 1
Sickness--well........
Man--absent...........19
Deep--together........12
Soft--plenty.......... 6
Eating--good.......... 1
Mountain--together....12
House--one............12
Black--America........19
Mutton--vegetable..... 2
Comfort--sleep........
Hand--nothing.........19
Short--never..........12
Fruit--vegetable......
Butterfly--bird.......
Smooth--large......... 9
Command--willing......
Chair--good........... 6
Sweet--always......... 6
Whistle--music........
Woman--one............12
Cold--medium.......... 6
Slow--quick...........
Wish--hope............
River--lake...........
White--always......... 6
Beautiful--medium..... 6
Window--open..........
Rough--smooth.........
Citizen--American.....
Foot--two.............
Spider--butterfly.....
Needle--steel.........
Red--color............
Sleep--plenty.........
Anger--never..........
Carpet--floor.........
Girl--five............12
High--medium..........
Working--always.......
Sour--never........... 6
Earth--cultivate......17
Trouble--none.........
Soldier--willing......15
Cabbage--vegetable....
Hard--seldom..........12
Eagle--American.......
Stomach--no...........12
Stem--one.............12
Lamp--burning.........
Dream--always......... 6
Yellow--sometimes.....12
Bread--soft...........
Justice--always.......
Boy--two..............12
Light--plenty.........
Health--plenty........
Bible--Catholic.......17
Memory--good.......... 1
Sheep--wool...........
Bath--good............ 1
Cottage--plenty....... 6
Swift--medium......... 6
Blue--never........... 6
Hungry--seldom........ 6
Priest--good.......... 1
Ocean--three..........12
Head--good............ 1
Stove--burning........
Long--medium..........
Religion--willing.....15
Whiskey--some.........19
Child--good........... 1
Bitter--never......... 6
Hammer--tool..........
Thirsty--seldom....... 6
City--New York........
Square--always........ 6
Better--good.......... 1
Doctor--good.......... 1
Loud--medium.......... 6
Thief--none...........
Lion--animal..........
Joy--plenty........... 6
Bed--good............. 1
Heavy--medium......... 6
Tobacco--yes..........12
Baby--more............19
Moon--bright..........
Scissors--sharp.......
Quiet--plenty......... 6
Green--good........... 6
Salt--little..........19
Street--lots..........18
King--none............
Cheese--seldom........ 6
Blossom--always....... 6
Afraid--sometimes.....15


CASE No. 4847.--C.C. Distraction

Table--eat............
Dark--lock............10
Music--fiddle.........
Sickness--doctors..... 2
Man--woman............ 1
Deep--water...........
Soft--snow............
Eating--oats..........17
Mountain--spray.......19
House--building.......
Black--red............15
Mutton--meat.......... 9
Comfort--red..........15
Hand--people.......... 9
Short--world..........19
Fruit--age............18
Butterfly--bird.......
Smooth--eggs..........18
Command--cake.........19
Chair--world..........15
Sweet--cherries.......
Whistle--peaches......18
Woman--children.......
Cold--summer..........17
Slow--brother.........19
Wish--pear............19
River--orange.........18
White--black..........
Beautiful--red........13
Window--door..........
Rough--table..........
Citizen--couch........19
Foot--arm.............
Spider--fly...........
Needle--scissors......17
Red--blue.............
Sleep--pink...........13
Anger--box............19
Carpet--rug...........
Girl--boy.............
High--play............
Working--cup..........19
Sour--bread...........17
Earth--picture........19
Trouble--soap.........19
Soldier--towel........18
Cabbage--turnip.......
Hard--tree............
Eagle--clock..........19
Stomach--eat..........
Stem--soap............15
Lamp--oil.............
Dream--glass..........13

Yellow--bottle........18
Bread--soap...........15
Justice--pencil.......19
Boy--picture..........15
Light--darkness.......
Health--washstand.....19
Bible--book...........
Memory--saucer........19
Sheep--chair..........19
Bath--bureau..........14

Cottage--pan..........19
Swift--towel..........15
Blue--wash............ 2
Hungry--eat...........
Priest--church........
Ocean--beans..........19
Head--prunes..........18
Stove--cook...........
Long--fig.............19
Religion--church......
Whiskey--tea..........17
Child--people......... 1
Bitter--stomach.......19
Hammer--tack..........
Thirsty--peach........15
City--box.............15
Square--soap..........15
Butter--lard..........
Doctor--sick..........
Loud--head............19
Thief--cup............15
Lion--bottle..........15
Joy--pitcher..........19
Bed--sheet............
Heavy--blanket........13
Tobacco--mustard......19
Baby--pepper..........18
Moon--heater..........19
Scissors--string......
Quiet--lace...........19
Green--red............
Salt--soda............17
Street--soldier.......19
King--box.............15
Cheese--cake..........
Blossom--shell........19
Afraid--blotter.......19


CASE No. 3597.--L.T. Some neologisms, all possessing obvious meaning.

Table--stand..........
Dark--light...........
Music--instrument.....
Sickness--health......
Man--female...........
Deep--detableness..... 4
Soft--hard............
Eating--starving......
Mountain--isthmus.....17
House--building.......
Black--white..........
Mutton--beef..........
Comfort--patient......
Hand--leg.............
Short--long...........
Fruit--vegetable......
Butterfly--spider.....
Smooth--coarse........
Command--thought...... 1
Chair--utensil........19
Sweet--sour...........
Whistle--trumpet......
Woman--man............ 1
Cold--warm............
Slow--quick...........
Wish--command.........
River--lake...........
White--black..........
Beautiful--pretty..... 1
Window--door..........
Rough--straight.......
Citizen--tramp........19
Foot--arm.............
Spider--fly...........
Needle--pin...........
Red--blue.............
Sleep--awake..........
Anger--patient........ 2
Carpet--rug...........
Girl--servant.........
High--low.............
Working--laziness.....
Sour--sweet...........
Earth--hemisphere.....
Trouble--goodness..... 9
Soldier--merchant.....17
Cabbage--pumpkin......17
Hard--tight...........
Eagle--hawk...........
Stomach--abdomen......
Stem--leaf............
Lamp--lantern.........
Dream--nightmare......
Yellow--lavender......17
Bread--pastry.........
Justice--badness...... 2
Boy--child............
Light--darkness.......
Health--sickness......
Bible--testament......
Memory--remember......
Sheep--lamb...........
Bath--dirtiness....... 2
Cottage--building.....
Swift--quickly........
Blue--redness......... 2
Hungry--starving......
Priest--minister......
Ocean--sea............
Head--topness......... 4
Stove--cooking........
Long--shorter......... 2
Religion--wickedness..
Whiskey--medicine.....
Child--daughter.......
Bitter--sweetness..... 2
Hammer--pickaxe.......17
Thirsty--drinkness.... 4
City--village.........
Square--strightness... 2
Butter--syrup.........17
Doctor--queen.........19
Loud--low.............
Thief--burglar........
Lion--tiger...........
Joy--enjoyable........ 2
Bed--bedstead.........
Heavy--lightness......
Tobacco--sweetness.... 2
Baby--infant..........
Moon--sun.............
Scissors--shears......
Quite--noiseness...... 4
Green--greenbill...... 3
Salt--sugar...........
Street--island........19
King--nephew..........19
Cheese--curdness...... 4
Blossom--bud..........
Afraid--knowledgeable. 4


GENERAL PARESIS.

Cases presenting no considerable dementia or confusion and cases in a
state of remission are apt to give normal test records. As we proceed
from the records of such cases to those of cases showing mental
deterioration we observe a gradual reduction in the values of
reactions, contraction of the mental horizon,[1] and the appearance of
the phenomenon of perseveration. We submit the following test records
for illustration:

[Footnote 1: What we mean by contraction of the mental horizon has
already been described in connection with epilepsy, page 47.]

CASE No. 4047.--C.A.F. Almost complete remission of all mental
symptoms. Normal record.

Table--dish...........
Dark--light...........
Music--sound..........
Sickness--disease.....
Man--woman............ 1
Deep--fathomless......
Soft--sweet...........
Eating--food..........
Mountain--high........
House--barn...........
Black--color..........
Mutton--meat..........
Comfort--ease.........
Hand--foot............
Short--long...........
Fruit--sweet..........
Butterfly--moth.......
Smooth--rough.........
Command--order........
Chair--leg............
Sweet--pleasant....... 1
Whistle--sound........
Woman--female.........
Cold--ice.............
Slow--languid.........17
Wish--desire..........
River--long...........
White--color..........
Beautiful--fair.......
Window--glass.........
Rough--smooth.........
Citizen--voter........
Foot--toe.............
Spider--fly...........
Needle--sharp.........
Red--color............
Sleep--slumber........
Anger--rage...........
Carpet--sweep.........
Girl--maiden..........
High--lofty...........
Working--toiling......
Sour--distasteful.....
Earth--ground.........
Trouble--sorrow.......
Soldier--fighter......
Cabbage--leaf.........
Hard--easy............
Eagle--fly............
Stomach--food.........
Stem--petal...........
Lamp--light...........
Dream--slumber........
Yellow--color.........
Bread--eat............
Justice--judgment.....
Boy--youth............
Light--lamp...........
Health--nature........17
Bible--holy...........
Memory--remember......
Sheep--lamb...........
Bath--water...........
Cottage--house........
Swift--fast...........
Blue--color...........
Hungry--famished......
Priest--holy..........
Ocean--sea............
Head--top.............
Stove--fire...........
Long--short...........
Religion--holy........
Whiskey--drink........
Child--infant.........
Bitter--sour..........
Hammer--knock.........
Thirsty--drink........
City--town............
Square--round.........
Butter--eat...........
Doctor--physician.....
Loud--knock...........
Thief--steal..........
Lion--tiger...........
Joy--happiness........ 1
Bed--sleep............
Heavy--weigh..........
Tobacco--smoke........
Baby--child...........
Moon--stars...........
Scissors--cut.........
Quiet--soft...........
Green--color..........
Salt--food............
Street--lane..........
King--queen...........
Cheese--eat...........
Blossom--flower.......
Afraid--fear..........


CASE No. 6660.--F.F. Repetition of words previously given;
non-specific reactions; unclassified reactions some of which are
"circumstantial" (see page 25).

Table--bureau.........19
Dark--boats........... 2
Music--piano..........
Sickness--doctor......
Man--sober............19
Deep--cellar..........
Soft--easy............
Eating--chewing.......
Mountain--climb.......
House--tenants........ 2
Black--color..........
Mutton--meat..........
Comfort--easy.........
Hand--use............. 1
Short--stump.......... 2
Fruit--nice........... 1
Butterfly--like....... 6
Smooth--clean.........
Command--faithful.....17
Chair--easy...........
Sweet--like........... 6
Whistle--good......... 6
Woman--like........... 6
Cold--medicine........
Slow--I...............12
Wish--like............
River--boats..........
White--sheet..........
Beautiful--flowers....
Window--red...........14
Rough--streets........ 2
Citizen--honest.......
Foot--walking.........
Spider--kill..........10
Needle--sew...........
Red--nice............. 6
Sleep--rest...........
Anger--cross..........
Carpet--good.......... 6
Girl--nice............ 1
High--good............ 1
Working--well.........19
Sour--bitter..........
Earth--property.......19
Trouble--fighting.....
Soldier--good......... 1
Cabbage--eat..........
Hard--sorry...........19
Eagle--good........... 6
Stomach--good......... 1
Stem--fair............19
Lamp--use............. 1
Dream--now............12
Yellow--color.........
Bread--good........... 1
Justice--fine......... 1
Boy--good............. 1
Light--good........... 1
Health--right.........19
Bible--home...........
Memory--good.......... 1
Sheep--like........... 6
Bath--good............ 1
Cottage--fine......... 1
Swift--go.............
Blue--nice............ 6
Hungry--bad........... 1
Priest--Father........
Ocean--boats..........
Head--brains..........
Stove--heat...........
Long--streets.........
Religion--Catholic....
Whiskey--bad.......... 1
Child--good........... 1
Bitter--sorrow........
Hammer--use........... 1
Thirsty--drink........
City--Brooklyn........
Squares--park......... 2
Butter--ice...........19
Doctor--cure..........
Loud--holler..........
Thief--no............. 2
Lion--no.............. 6
Joy--hope.............
Bed--rest.............
Heavy--loud...........
Tobacco--good......... 1
Baby--good............ 1
Moon--light...........
Scissors--use......... 1
Quiet--good........... 1
Green--nice........... 6
Salt--use............. 1
Street--nice.......... 1
King--right...........19
Cheese--nice.......... 1
Blossom--grow.........
Afraid--no............


CASE No. 618.--R.N. Numerous particles of speech; some unclassified
reaction, chiefly "circumstantial" (see page 25).

Table--eat............
Dark--cloudy..........
Music--fond...........19
Sickness--well........
Man--human............
Deep--ocean...........
Soft--fine............ 1
Eating--yes........... 6
Mountain--yes......... 5
House--yes............ 5
Black--yes............ 5
Mutton--yes........... 5
Comfort--yes.......... 5
Hand--finger..........
Short--yes............ 6
Fruit--yes............ 5
Butterfly--yes........ 5
Smooth--even..........
Command--obey.........
Chair--settle.........17
Sweet--bitter.........
Whistle--can't........19
Woman--lady...........
Cold--ice.............
Slow--fast............
Wish--give............
River--enjoyment......19
White--black..........
Beautiful--yes........ 6
Window--pane..........
Rough--smooth.........
Citizen--yes.......... 6
Foot--one.............12
Spider--yes........... 6
Needle--sewing........
Red--blue.............
Sleep--nap............17
Anger--willing........19
Carpet--yes........... 6
Girl--nature..........19
High--low.............
Working--artist.......17
Sour--sweet...........
Earth--world..........
Trouble--peaceful.....

Soldier--no...........12
Cabbage--vegetable....
Hard--soft............
Eagle--American.......
Stomach--condition....
Stem--post............17
Lamp--light...........
Dream--thinking....... 1
Yellow--green.........
Bread--loaf...........
Justice--yes..........
Boy--human............
Light--heaven.........
Health--wealth........
Bible--yes............ 6
Memory--yes........... 5
Sheep--animal.........
Bath--yes............. 6
Cottage--yes.......... 5
Swift--fast...........
Blue--gray............
Hungry--no............
Priest--yes........... 6
Ocean--water..........
Head--human...........
Stove--coal...........
Long--short...........
Religion--yes......... 6
Whiskey--no...........12
Child--baby...........
Bitter--sweet.........
Hammer--pincher.......17
Thirsty--drinking.....
City--population......
Square--circle........
Butter--lard..........
Doctor--physician.....
Loud--low.............
Thief--penalty........17
Lion--liar............10
Joy--welcome..........17
Bed--sleep............
Heavy--light..........
Tobacco--yes.......... 6
Baby--human...........
Moon--natural.........15
Scissors--no..........12
Quiet--yes............ 6
Green--shade..........
Salt--eat.............
Street--town..........
King--ruler...........
Cheese--eat...........
Blossom--blooming.....
Afraid--scared........


CASE No. 6518.--C.Z. Perseveration shown by numerous instances of
association to preceding reaction.

Table--horse..........19
Dark--wren............10
Music--lark...........18
Sickness--cold........
Man--woman............ 1
Deep--sea.............
Soft--hard............
Eating--drinking......
Mountain--fountain....
House--barn...........
Black--stable.........13
Mutton--cow...........
Comfort--horse........18
Hand--lamb............
Short--calf...........
Fruit--apples.........
Butterfly--oranges.... 2
Smooth--peaches.......18
Command--plums........18
Chair--bench..........
sweet--sugar..........
Whistle--drum.........17
Woman--man............ 1
Cold--hot.............
Slow--fast............
Wish--who.............12
River--water..........
White--blue...........
Beautiful--splendid...
Window--sashes........ 2
Rough--ready..........
Citizen--Brooklyn.....
Foot--shoe............
Spider--web...........
Needle--pin...........
Red--blue.............
Sleep--awake..........
Anger--bad............ 1
Carpet--sweeper.......
Girl--boy.............
High--low.............
Working--playing......
Sour--sweet...........
Earth--ground.........
Trouble--wheelbarrow..19
Soldier--Mexican......17
Cabbage--potatoes.....
Hard--beets...........18
Eagle--carrots........18
Stomach--peas.........18
Stem--peas............ 5
Lamp--burning.........
Dream--happy.......... 1
Yellow--blue..........
Bread--green..........12
Justice--freedom......
Boy--girl.............
Light--burning........
Health--strength......
Bible--prayerbook.....
Memory--thoughts...... 1
Sheep--lamb...........
Bath--water...........
Cottage--house........
Swift--whist..........10
Blue--red.............
Hungry--eating........
Priest--Father........
Ocean--mother.........18
Head--brother.........18
Stove--sister.........18
Long--freedom.........15
Religion--smart.......19
Whiskey--wine.........
Child--lamb...........19
Bitter--goat..........18
Hammer--nails.........
Thirsty--dry..........
City--talking.........19
Square--inches........
Butter--cheese........
Doctor--bread.........13
Loud--oranges.........15
Thief--almonds........18
Lion--apples..........18
Joy--grapes...........18
Bed--peaches..........18
Heavy--cranberries....18
Tobacco--grapes.......18
Baby--watermelon......18
Moon--muskmelons......18
Scissors--citrons.....10
Quiet--squashes.......18
Green--pumpkins.......18
Salt--cucumbers.......18
Street--tomatoes......18
Kings--pears..........18
Cheese--apples........18
Blossom--cherries.....
Afraid--gooseberries..18


CASE No. 5329.--B.W. Perseveration; record almost entirely made up of
instances of association to preceding reaction.

Table--San Francisco...19
Dark--comprehensible...19
Music--sinking.........
Sickness--Brooklyn.....19
Man--woman............. 1
Deep--amazing..........19
Soft--pleasant......... 9
Eating--digesting......
Mountain--gulf.........17
House--peninsula.......18
Black--Constantinople..18
Mutton--Bermuda........18
Comfort--Los Angeles...18
Hand--Cuba.............18
Short--cities..........18
Fruit--Iowa............18
Butterfly--England.....18
Smooth--Russia.........18
Command--Turkey........18
Chair--Manila..........18
Sweet--Porto Rico......18
Whistle--Washington....18
Woman--Cincinnati......18
Cold--Pittsburg........18
Slow--Philadelphia.....
Wish--Milwaukee........18
River--St. Louis.......18
White--Japan...........18
Beautiful--China.......18
Window--Berlin.........18
Rough--Glasgow.........18
Citizen--London........18
Foot--Dublin...........18
Spider--Sacramento.....18
Needle--Texas..........18
Red--North Carolina....18
Sleep--Florida.........18
Anger--Seattle.........18
Carpet--Nevada.........18
Girl--Iowa.............15
High--Virginia.........18
Working--Louisiana.....18
Sour--Hawaii...........18
Earth--Connecticut.....18
Trouble--Rhode Island..18
Soldier--Vermont.......18
Cabbage--Massachusetts.18
Hard--Hudson...........18
Eagle--East River......18
Stomach--Staten Island.18
Stem--Kings Park.......18
Lamp--Fort Lee.........18
Dream--Long Island.....18
Yellow--Greenport......18
Bread--Southold........18
Justice--Northport.....18
Boy--New Jersey........18
Light--Rome............18
Health--Italy..........18
Bible--Episcopal.......17
Memory--Methodist......18
Sheep--Congregational..18
Bath--Baptist..........18
Cottage--minister......18
Swift--physician.......18
Blue--horse............18
Hungry--cow............18
Priest--Catholics.......
Ocean--lake.............
Head--bay...............13
Stove--sound............18
Long--Island............
Religion--Boston........18
Whiskey--Harvard........18
Child--Yale.............18
Bitter--Columbia........18
Hammer--library.........18
Thirsty--Carnegie.......18
City--Rockefeller.......18
Square--Harriman........18
Butter--Leggitt.........18
Doctor--Lincoln.........18
Loud--Roosevelt.........18
Thief--Taft.............18
Lion--Gaynor............18
Joy--Slocum.............18
Bed--Grant..............18
Heavy--McClellan........18
Tobacco--Spain..........19
Baby--New London........18
Moon--Newburgh..........18
Scissors--Troy..........18
Quiet--Schenectady......18
Green--Lake George......18
Salt--Vienna............18
Street--Alsace Lorraine.18
King--Garfield..........17
Cheese--McKinley........18
Blossom--Bryan..........18
Afraid--Blaine..........18


MANIC-DEPRESSIVE INSANITY.

In this disorder the departures from the normal seem to be less
pronounced than in the psychoses considered above. The number of
individual reactions is in most cases not greatly above the normal
average; and, so far as their character is concerned, we find that
many of them are classed as normal, in accordance with the appendix to
the frequency tables; among the unclassified reactions, which are
quite frequent here, we find mostly either obviously normal ones, or
some of the type to which we have already referred as "far-fetched,"
while others among them are "circumstantial" (see p. 25); further we
find that most of the remaining individual reactions fall into the
general group of partial dissociation: non-specific reactions, sound
reactions, word complements, and particles.

In some cases the only abnormality that is found is that of an undue
tendency to respond by non-specific reactions, most of them being
common and there being no excessive number of individual reactions. It
would seem legitimate to assume that this tendency is here to be
regarded as a manifestation of the phenomenon which is clinically
described as _dearth of ideas_. It is significant that this
tendency is observed not only in depressive phases of the psychosis,
but also in manic phases and even in the normal intervals of recurrent
cases or after apparent recovery in acute cases; this will be seen
from some of the test records which are here reproduced.

Occasionally cases are met with which give a large number of
unclassified reactions, seemingly incoherent. There can be no doubt
that at least some of these cases are clinically perfectly typical
ones of manic-depressive insanity, yet the test records strongly
resemble, in some respects, those of dementia præcox.

Since clinically the distinction between typical cases of these
psychoses can be so clearly made on the basis of the disorders of the
flow of thought respectively characterizing them, it could hardly be
assumed that the associational disturbances in these two groups of
cases are truly related, although there may be an apparent
resemblance; it must be acknowledged that we are here confronted with
one of the most serious shortcomings of the association test, or at
least of the present method of applying it.


CASE No. 5236.--M.B. Depressive attack. Normal record.

Table--eat............
Dark--night...........
Music--play...........
Sickness--death.......
Man--health...........13
Deep--depth...........
Soft--hard............
Eating--chewing.......
Mountain--high........
House--living.........
Black--color..........
Mutton--sheep.........
Comfort--kind......... 2
Hand--body............
Short--small.......... 1
Fruit--garden.........
Butterfly--spring.....
Smooth--rough.........
Command--obey.........
Chair--sit............
Sweet--apple..........
Whistle--music........
Woman--land...........
Cold--chilly..........
Slow--easy............
Wish--want............
River--water..........
White--color..........
Beautiful--grand......
Window--light.........
Rough--smooth.........
Citizen--man.......... 1
Foot--body............
Spider--animal........
Needle--sew...........
Red--color............
Sleep--rest...........
Anger--badness........ 2
Carpet--floor.........
Girl--young...........
High--low.............
Working--busy.........
Sour--sweet...........
Earth--live...........
Trouble--grief........
Soldier--army.........
Cabbage--garden.......
Hard--stone...........
Eagle--bird...........
Stomach--body.........
Stem--plant...........
Lamp--light...........
Dream--sleep..........
Yellow--color.........
Bread--eat............
Justice--kind......... 2
Boy--young............
Light--day............
Health--strength......
Bible--Christ.........
Memory--think......... 1
Sheep--mutton.........
Bath--clean...........
Cottage--live.........
Swift--run............
Blue--color...........
Hungry--food..........
Priest--clergy........
Ocean--water..........
Head--body............
Stove--fire...........
Long--tall............
Religion--teaching....
Whiskey--drink........
Child--young..........
Bitter--sweet.........
Hammer--nail..........
Thirsty--drink........
City--town............
Square--four..........
Butter--eat...........
Doctor--medicine......
Loud--noise...........
Thief--steal..........
Lion--beast...........
Joy--kind............. 6
Bed--sleep............
Heavy--weight.........
Tobacco--smoke........
Baby--mother..........
Moon--light...........
Scissors--cut.........
Quiet--kind........... 6
Green--grass..........
Salt--table...........
Street--walk..........
King--government......
Cheese--eat...........
Blossom--tree.........
Afraid--coward........


CASE No. 6120.--M.L. Maniacal attack. Fifteen individual reactions,
of which 11 are classed as normal in accordance with the appendix to
the frequency tables.

Table--chair............
Dark--light.............
Music--chorus...........17
Sickness--health........
Man--woman.............. 1
Deep--around............
Soft--light.............
Eating--food............
Mountain--valley........
House--flat.............17
Black--white............
Mutton--beef............
Comfort--disease........
Hand--legs..............
Short--tall.............
Fruit--grapes...........
Butterfly--birds........
Smooth--rough...........

Command--president......17
Chair--assemblyman......18
Sweet--bitter...........
Whistle--birds..........
Woman--man.............. 1
Cold--warm..............
Slow--fast..............
Wish--well..............
River--mountain.........
White--red..............
Beautiful--heaven.......
Window--door............
Rough--smooth...........
Citizen--naturalization.
Foot--hand..............
Spider--bug.............
Needle--doctor..........19
Red--white..............
Sleep--well.............
Anger--passion..........
Carpet--cloth...........
Girl--boy...............
High--low...............
Working--pleasure....... 1
Sour--sweet.............
Earth--heaven...........
Trouble--anger..........
Soldier--mine...........12
Cabbage--steak..........17

Hard--soft..............
Eagle--parrot...........
Stomach--pelvis.........17
Stem--flowers...........
Lamp--light.............
Dream--empty............17
Yellow--black...........
Bread--brown............
Justice--done...........
Boy--baby...............
Light--heaven...........
Health--wealth..........
Bible--love.............
Memory--remembrance.....
Sheep--goat.............
Bath--water.............
Cottage--house..........
Swift--slow.............
Blue--green.............
Hungry--I...............
Priest--minister........
Ocean--sea..............
Head--neck..............
Stove--electricity......17
Long--broad.............
Religion--Presbyterian..
Whiskey--medicinal...... 2
Child--boy..............
Bitter--sweet...........
Hammer--saw.............
Thirsty--water..........
City--Middletown........17
Square--Madison.........
Butter--bread...........
Doctor--love............15
Loud--soft..............
Thief--burglar..........
Lion--animal............
Joy--ecstasy............
Bed--couch..............
Heavy--lead.............
Tobacco--smoke..........
Baby--boy...............
Moon--stars.............
Scissors--cotton........17
Quiet--noisy............
Green--yellow...........
Salt--pepper............
Street--Dean............17
King--God...............17
Cheese--Roquefort.......
Blossom--apple..........
Afraid--never...........


CASE No. 6367.--J.N. Depressive attack. Only two individual
reactions, both classed as normal; undue tendency to give non-specific
reactions.

Table--cup............17
Dark--light...........
Music--song...........
Sickness--pain........
Man--child............
Deep--high............
Soft--hard............
Eating--tasting.......
Mountain--valley......
House--room...........
Black--white..........
Mutton--lamb..........
Comfort--peace........
Hand--foot............
Short--long...........
Fruit--apple..........
Butterfly--moth.......
Smooth--rough.........
Command--obey.........
Chair--table..........
Sweet--sour...........
Whistle--song.........
Woman--love...........
Cold--warm............
Slow--fast............
Wish--well............
River--water..........
White--black..........
Beautiful--grand......
Window--glass.........
Rough--smooth.........
Citizen--man.......... 1
Foot--hand............
Spider--fly...........
Needle--thread........
Red--blue.............
Sleep--rest...........
Anger--passion........
Carpet--rug...........
Girl--child...........
High--low.............
Working--labor........
Sour--sweet...........
Earth--ground.........
Trouble--overcome.....17
Soldier--brave........
Cabbage--lettuce......
Hard--soft............
Eagle--bird...........
Stomach--heart........
Stem--tree............
Lamp--light...........
Dream--sleep..........
Yellow--red...........
Bread--roll...........
Justice--peace........
Boy--child............
Light--sun............
Health--wealth........
Bible--good........... 1
Memory--good.......... 1
Sheep--lamb...........
Bath--water...........
Cottage--house........
Swift--fast...........
Blue--white...........
Hungry--eat...........
Priest--man........... 1
Ocean--water..........
Head--arm.............
Stove--warm...........
Long--short...........
Religion--good........ 1
Whiskey--none.........
Child--good........... 1
Bitter--sour..........
Hammer--noise.........
Thirsty--water........
City--country.........
Square--round.........
Butter--salt..........
Doctor--good.......... 1
Loud--noise...........
Thief--man............ 1
Lion--beast...........
Joy--good............. 1
Bed--good............. 1
Heavy--weight.........
Tobacco--smoke........
Baby--child...........
Moon--sun.............
Scissors--knife.......
Quiet--rest...........
Green--red............
Salt--water...........
Street--city..........
King--man............. 1
Cheese--butter........
Blossom--flower.......
Afraid--fear..........


CASE No. 5162.--W.H. Recurrent attacks, mixed in character; at time
of test patient was in a normal interval. 5 individual reactions, of
which 1 is classed as normal, 1 as a derivative, 2 as non-specific,
and 1 as a sound reaction; undue tendency to give non-specific
(common) reactions.

Table--comfort........
Dark--darknew......... 8
Music--pleasure....... 1
Sickness--sorrow......
Map--manners..........10
Deep--thought......... 1
Soft--comfort.........
Eating--pleasure...... 1
Mountain--height......
House--comfort........
Black--darkness.......
Mutton--eating........
Comfort--pleasure..... 1
Hand--useful.......... 1
Short--stumpy.........
Fruit--eating.........
Butterfly--handsome...
Smooth--plane.........
Command--ordering.....
Chair--easy...........
Sweet--candy..........
Whistle--noise........
Woman--love...........
Cold--freezing........
Slow--laziness........
Wish--good............ 1
River--water..........
White--clearness...... 2
Beautiful--handsome...
Window--scene.........
Rough--harshness......
Citizen--voting.......
Foot--stepping........
Spider--poison........
Needle--sharpness.....
Red--blood............
Sleep--comfort........
Anger--passion........
Carpet--walking.......
Girl--lovely..........
High--height..........
Working--business.....
Sour--tart............
Earth--planting.......
Trouble--Sorrow.......
Soldier--fighting.....
Cabbage--eating.......
Hard--harshness....... 2
Eagle--flying.........
Stomach--eating.......
Stem--vine............
Lamp--lighting........ 2
Dream--pleasure....... 1
Yellow--color.........
Bread--eating.........
Justice--suing........17
Boy--children.........
Light--seeing.........
Health--pleasure...... 1
Bible--thinking....... 9
Memory--recollections.
Sheep--wool...........
Bath--pleasure........ 1
Cottage--living.......
Swift--quickness......
Blue--sky.............

Hungry--pleasure...... 9
Priest--holiness......
Ocean--sailing........
Head--thinking........ 1
Stove--warmth.........
Long--length..........
Religion--holiness....
Whiskey--badness...... 2
Child--pleasure....... 1
Bitter--sourness......
Hammer--pounding......
Thirsty--drinking.....
City--town............
Square--measure.......
Butter--greasy........
Doctor--medicine......
Loud--hearing......... 2
Thief--stealing.......
Lion--fierceness......
Joy--pleasure......... 1
Bed--sleeping.........
Heavy--solid..........
Tobacco--pleasure..... 1
Baby--loveliness......
Moon--bright..........
Scissors--sharpness....
Quiet--pleasure....... 1
Green--color..........
Salt--taste...........
Street--walking.......
King--majestic.........
Cheese--eating........
Blossom--handsome.....
Afraid--fear..........


CASE No. 6279.--A.F. Maniacal attack; at time of test patient had
improved, though not recovered. Non-specific reactions; particles.
(Patient does not speak English with perfect fluency.)

Table--board..........
Dark--night...........
Music--piano..........
Sickness--appendicitis
Man--husband..........
Deep--hole............
Soft--hard............
Eating--vegetable.....
Mountain--country.....
House--comfort........
Black--cotton.........17
Mutton--lamb..........
Comfort--rest.........
Hand--arm.............
Short--Journey........
Fruit--apples.........
Butterfly--love.......13
Smooth--nice.......... 1
Command--order........
Chair--down...........12
Sweet--sugar..........
Whistle--blow.........
Woman--good........... 1
Cold--ice.............
Slow--lazy............
Wish--home............
River--boat...........
White--milk...........
Beautiful--flowers....
Window--corner........
Rough--man............ 1
Citizen--not..........12
Foot--short...........
Spider--don't.........12
Needle--steel.........
Red--rose.............
Sleep--well...........
Anger--not............
Carpet--beauty........ 1
Girl--love............
High--reason..........19
Working--dress........19
Sour--vinegar.........
Earth--ground.........
Trouble--much.........
Soldier--blue.........
Cabbage--sour.........
Hard--no..............12
Eagle--paper..........
Stomach--well.........17
Stem--flower..........
Lamp--light...........
Dream--awful..........19
Yellow--flower........
Bread--rye............
Justice--court........
Boy--little...........
Light--room...........
Health--love..........15
Bible--no.............
Memory--good.......... 1
Sheep--lot............19
Bath--cold............
Cottage--little.......
swift--kick...........17
Blue--no..............12
Hungry--no............
Priest--love..........15
Ocean--Grove..........
Head--black...........
Stove--shine..........19
Long--square..........
Religion--no..........
Whiskey--champagne....17
Child--my............. 2
Bitter--pepper........
Hammer--knock.........
Thirsty--no...........12
City--New York........
Square--table.........
Butter--good.......... 1
Doctor--S.............17
Loud--talk............
Thief--night..........
Lion--yes.............12
Joy--good............. 1
Bed--comfort..........
Heavy--Iron...........
Tobacco--strong.......
Baby--love............
Moon--shine...........
Scissors--cut........
Quiet--well...........
Green--bow............17
Salt--hitter..........
Street--Hinsdale......17
King--Franz Joseph....17
Cheese--Swiss.........
Blossom--nice......... 1
Afraid--no............


CASE No. 4578.--E.M. Circular insanity of over twenty years' standing;
at time of test patient was in a manic phase. Non-specific reactions;
doubtful reactions; neologisms, all possessing obvious meaning.

Table--using.......... 1
Dark--unbright........ 4
Music--songs..........
Sickness--catching....17
Man--masculine........
Deep--high............
Soft--chew............19
Eating--sometimes.....12
Mountain--highlands...
House--live...........
Black--color..........
Mutton--meat..........
Comfort--easy.........
Hand--body............
Short--unlongly....... 4
Fruit--plants.........
Butterfly--insects....
Smooth--feeling.......
Command--do...........
Chair--use............ 1
Sweet--taste..........
Whistle--act..........
Woman--female.........
Cold--acting.......... 2
Slow--gradually.......17
Wish--desire..........
River--water..........
White--color..........
Beautiful--niceness... 2
Window--built.........19
Rough--treatment......17
Citizen--country......
Foot--body............
Spider--insect........
Needle--article....... 1
Red--color............
Sleep--tiredness...... 4
Anger--scolding.......
Carpet--article....... 1
Girl--female..........
High--low.............
Working--do...........
Sour--tasting.........
Earth--surface........
Trouble--worriment....
Soldier--man.......... 1
Cabbage--vegetable....
Hard--difficult.......
Eagle--bird...........
Stomach--body.........
Stem--article......... 6
Lamp--article......... 1
Dream--untruly........ 4
Yellow--color.........
Bread--food...........
Justice--unfairly..... 2
Boy--masculine........
Light--easy...........
Health--sickness......
Bible--commandments...
Memory--remember......
Sheep--animal.........
Bath--cleanness.......
Cottage--country......
Swift--quickly........
Blue--color...........
Hungry--food..........
Priest--masculine.....15
Ocean--water..........
Head--body............
Stove--article........ 1
Long--shortly......... 2
Religion--Bible.......
Whiskey--drinking.....
Child--disremembering. 4
Bitter--taste.........
Hammer--using......... 1
Thirsty--drinking.....
City--acting..........15
Square--measuring..... 2
Butter--food..........
Doctor--helping....... 2
Loud--hearing......... 2
Thief--untrue.........15
Lion--animal..........
Joy--gladness.........
Bed--lying............
Heavy--unlightly...... 4
Tobacco--using........ 1
Baby--borning......... 4
Moon--sending.........19
Scissors--using....... 1
Quiet--acting......... 2
Green--color..........
Salt--food............
Street--walking.......
King--person.......... 1
Cheese--food..........
Blossom--plant........
Afraid--frightened....


CASE No. 5878.--A.B. Maniacal attack. 48 individual reactions, of
which 18 are classed as normal, 10 are sound reactions (2 sound
neologisms), 1 word complement, 8 particles, and 11 unclassified
reactions most of which are either obviously normal or "far fetched"
but not strictly incoherent.

Table--mahogany.......
Dark--green...........
Music--masonic........10
Sickness--seasickness.10
Man--maternity........10
Deep--well............
Soft--silk............
Eating--cleanliness...19
Mountain--Gibraltar...17
House--bungalow.......
Black--light..........
Mutton--lamb..........
Comfort--linen........17
Hand--left............17
Short--shorthand......10
Fruit--pears..........
Butterfly--canary.....17
Smooth--linen.........17
Command--pilot........17
Chair--round..........
Sweet--sugar..........
Whistle--mother.......19
Woman--twenty-one.....12
Cold--ice.............
Slow--music...........
Wish--girl............
River--Hudson.........
White--plaster........17
Beautiful--nature.....
Window--St. Patrick's.17
Rough--blankets.......19
Citizen--twenty-one...12
Foot--six.............12
Spider--fly...........
Needle--tailor........
Red--Herald...........19
Sleep--seven..........12
Anger--Angoria........ 3
Carpet--green.........
Girl--eighteen........12
High--school..........11
Working--ten..........12
Sour--kraut...........
Earth--round..........
Trouble--son..........19
Soldier--navy.........
Cabbage--curly........19
Hard--stone...........
Eagle--almanac........17
Stomach--stomjack..... 3
Stem--maple...........17
Lamp--New.....York....19
Dream--husband........19
Yellow--cards.........17
Bread--rye............
Justice--liberty......
Boy--Joe..............
Light--white..........
Health--death.........10
Bible--holy...........
Memory--seven.........12
Sheep--lamb...........
Bath--cleanliness.....
Cottage--gray.........17
Swift--ball...........
Blue--balloon.........10
Hungry--yes...........12
Priest--doctor........
Ocean--Niagara........17
Head--rest............
Stove--stationary.....10
Long--poems...........19
Religion--Catholic....
Whiskey--Hunter.......
Child--Jesus..........17
Bitter--gall..........
Hammer--steel.........
Thirsty--water........
City--New York........
Square--Union.........
Butter--sweet.........
Doctor--S.............17
Loud--discreet........19
Thief--night..........
Lion--Bostock......... 2
Joy--Joy Line.........10
Bed--Ostermoor........17
Heavy--iron...........
Tobacco--Durham.......
Baby--Rose............17
Moon--half............
Scissors--steel.......
Quiet--nursing........19
Green--grass..........
Salt--rock............
Street--Liberty.......17
King--Alphonso........
Cheese--Swiss.........
Blossom--apple........
Afraid--dark..........


CASE No. 6511.--U.B. Maniacal attack. Persistent use of particles
_oh, me, I, none,_ etc.

Table--none........... 6
Dark--red.............
Music--stock..........19
Sickness--rose........19
Man--Frank............17
Deep--blue............
Soft--pillow..........
Eating--no............12
Mountain--oyster......11
House--mercy..........19
Black--mother.........19
Mutton--me............ 6
Comfort--home.........
Hand--mother..........15
Short--me............. 6
Fruit--me............. 5
Butterfly--it.........12
Smooth--oh............12
Command--none......... 6
Chair--none........... 5
Sweet--for............12
Whistle--bird.........
Woman--I.............. 6
Cold--I............... 5
Slow--me..............
Wish--none............ 2
River--are............12
White--wife...........10
Beautiful--Alma.......17
Window--Stephen.......19
Rough--Rudolphia......10
Citizen--father.......17
Foot--Anthon..........19
Spider--reverend......19
Needle--pine..........17

Red--brother..........19
Sleep--Adam...........19
Anger--I.............. 6
Carpet--home..........
Girl--Agatha..........17
High--niece...........13
Working--I............ 6
Sour--I............... 5
Earth--I.............. 5
Trouble--I............ 5
Soldier--father.......15
Cabbage--hail.........19
Hard--me..............12
Eagle--I.............. 6
Stomach--I............ 5
Stem--life............
Lamp--Lambert.........10
Dream--I.............. 6
Yellow--I............. 5
Bread--I.............. 5
Justice--I............ 5
Boy--just.............13
Light--picture........19
Health--cook..........19
Bible--beads..........17
Memory--Dick..........19
Sheep--to.............12
Bath--none............
Cottage--home.........
Swift--lazy...........
Blue--Nell............19
Hungry--I.............
Priest--I............. 5
Ocean--I.............. 5
Head--home............ 6
Stove--home...........
Long--short...........
Religion--none........
Whiskey--none.........
Child--Sylvester......17
Bitter--I............. 6
Hammer--my............12
Thirsty--no........... 6
City--no.............. 5
Square--Ben...........19
Butter--I............. 6
Doctor--I............. 5
Loud--bell............
Thief--iron...........19
Lion--I............... 6
Joy--I................ 5
Bed--I................ 5
Heavy--I.............. 5
Tobacco--I............ 5
Baby--I............... 5
Moon--will............12
Scissors--beads.......15
Quiet--nerves.........19
Green--I.............. 6
Salt--I............... 5
Street--Peter.........17
King--I............... 6
Cheese--I............. 5
Blossom--I............ 5
Afraid--no............


CASE No. 4427.--A.R. Maniacal attack. Unusual number of doubtful
reactions; 46 individual reactions of which 9 are classed as normal;
29 are unclassified, some seemingly incoherent.

Table--Chicago........19
Dark--Montreal........18
Music--Mississippi....18
Sickness--flowers.....19
Man--ocean............19
Deep--medicines.......19
Soft--accidental......19
Eating--vaccination...19
Mountain--evergreens..17
House--caves..........19
Black--station........19
Mutton--operations....19
Comfort--money........
Hand--bandages........10
Short--soldiers.......19
Fruit--dictionary.....19
Butterfly--storehouse.19
Smooth--vegetables....18
Command--Bible........
Chair--histories......14
Sweet--farewells......19
Whistle--ammunition...19
Woman--foreign........19
Cold--armory..........19
Slow--St. Petersburg..19
Wish--wealth..........
River--revenue........10
White--purity.........
Beautiful--colonial...19
Window--shutters......
Rough--planes......... 2
Citizen--naturalization
Foot--carriage........19
Spider--remedies......19
Needle--canoe.........19
Red--refreshments.....10
Sleep--restfulness.... 2
Anger--usefulness..... 9
Carpet--coach.........19
Girl--finery..........19
High--fortifications..19
Working--materials....19
Sour--pickles.........
Earth--gravitation.... 2
Trouble--graphophone..19
Soldier--guns.........
Cabbage--children.....19
Hard--inheritance.....19
Eagle--feathers.......
Stomach--envelope.....19
Stem--roots...........
Lamp--oil.............
Dream--fairies........17
Yellow--lemons........ 2
Bread--jams...........17
Justice--repentance...17
Boy--clothes..........
Light--lanterns.......17
Health--joys.......... 2
Bible--heaven.........
Memory--head..........
Sheep--pastures.......
Bath--cleanliness.....
Cottage--home.........
Swift--rapids......... 2
Blue--truth...........
Hungry--appetite......
Priest--saintliness...17
Ocean--ships..........
Head--intelligence....
Stove--woods.......... 2
Long--trains.......... 2
Religion--godliness... 2
Whiskey--drunkenness..
Child--joyfulness..... 2
Bitter--olives........
Hammer--nuts..........
Thirsty--water........
City--shopping........
Square--monuments..... 2
Butter--crackers......17
Doctor--medicines.....
Loud--music...........
Thief--detectives..... 2
Lion--cages........... 2
Joy--home.............
Bed--restfulness...... 2
Heavy--expressage.....17
Tobacco--cigars.......
Baby--carriage........
Moon--light...........
Scissors--goods.......
Quiet--peacefulness...
Green--vegetables.....
Salt--water...........
Street--stones........
King--crown...........
Cheese--knife.........
Blossom--plants....... 2
Afraid--enemies.......17


CASE No. 6457.--C.G. Depressive attack. 36 individual reactions of
which 9 are classed as normal and 20 as unclassified; among the latter
several seem to be incoherent

Table--fish...........17
Dark--boat............
Music--water..........18
Sickness--tank........18
Man--horse............
Deep--ocean...........
Soft--egg.............
Eating--beans.........17
Mountain--grass.......
House--roof...........
Black--bath...........10
Mutton--butcher.......
Comfort--cigar........17
Hand--shoes...........19
Short--baseball.......19
Fruit--orange.........
Butterfly--elephant...19
Smooth--glass.........
Command--general......
Chair--kitchen........17
Sweet--cake...........17
Whistle--bird.........
Woman--door...........19
Cold--ice.............
Slow--cat.............19
Wish--bed.............19
River--trout..........17
White--paint..........
Beautiful--monkey.....19
Window--bars..........
Rough--rowdy..........
Citizen--policeman....
Foot--fine............ 9
Spider--insect........
Needle--sewing........
Red--man.............. 9
Sleep--pond...........19
Anger--hatred.........
Carpet--tacks.........
Girl--floor...........13
High--mountain........
Working--dog..........19
Sour--milk............
Earth--mud............
Trouble--radiator.....19
Soldier--cannon.......
Cabbage--vegetable....
Hard--wood............
Eagle--quick..........19
Stomach--flesh........
Stem--pipe............
Lamp--burn............
Dream--thinking....... 1
Yellow--mice..........19
Bread--baker..........
Justice--equality.....
Boy--young............
Light--green..........17
Health--art...........19
Bible--preacher.......
Memory--return........19
Sheep--fold...........
Bath--water...........
Cottage--house........
Swift--fleeting....... 2
Blue--dark............
Hungry--thirst........
Priest--elephant......15
Ocean--briny..........19
Head--hard............
Stove--black..........
Long--grass...........
Religion--thinking.... 1
Whiskey--Kentucky.....
Child--carriage.......
Bitter--pickles.......
Hammer--nails.........
Thirsty--wanting......
City--New York........
Square--base..........17
Butter--cow...........
Doctor--carriage......
Loud--hall............19
Thief--prison.........
Lion--cage............
Joy--automobile.......
Bed--iron.............
Heavy--lead...........
Tobacco--weed.........
Baby--rocker..........
Moon--sky.............
Scissors--laundry.....19
Quiet--peaceful.......
Green--engine.........19
Salt--grocer..........19
Street--Lincoln.......17
King--Spain...........
Cheese--baker.........19
Blossom--flower.......
Afraid--going......... 2


INVOLUTIONAL MELANCHOLIA; ALCOHOLIC DEMENTIA; SENILE DEMENTIA.

There are so few cases of these psychoses in our series that we can
say but little concerning their associational disorders.

In Table V. we show all the types of reactions given by each subject.

We have not observed in our cases of _involutional melancholia_ any
undue tendency to give individual reactions. The records are either
perfectly normal or slightly abnormal in that they show an increase of
the non-specific (common) reactions. In this respect they resemble
strongly the records obtained from some cases of manic-depressive
insanity. This similarity is of interest in connection with other
evidence, recently brought to light, [1] showing that involutional
melancholia is closely related to manic-depressive insanity, if not
identical with it.

[Footnote 1: G. L. Dreyfus. Die Melancholic ein Zustandsbild des
manisch-depressiven Irreseins. 1907.]


TABLE V.
                                    +-----------------------+-----------------+-----------+
                                    |       Involutional    |    Alcoholic    |   Senile  |
                                    |        Melancholia    |     Dementia    |  Dementia |
                                    +--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
                                    |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 0|  |  |  |  |  |
                                    | 6| 4| 5| 6| 6| 6| 4| 5| 5| 6| 5| 6| 1| 6| 6| 5| 6| 5|
                          Case No.--| 2| 8| 7| 4| 3| 0| 8| 6| 2| 3| 9| 4| 0| 4| 4| 8| 5| 7|
TYPES OF REACTION                   | 0| 1| 1| 8| 6| 7| 1| 3| 9| 6| 6| 6| 0| 1| 7| 3| 3| 8|
                                    | 7| 8| 9| 0| 8| 7| 2| 5| 8| 9| 7| 9| 9| 8| 1| 7| 3| 8|
                                    +--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
_Common reactions:_                 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
  Specific reactions................|86|92|79|92|83|86|83|78|90|79|75|77|80|46|72|71|82|77|
  Non-specific reactions............|13| 2|12| 1| 9| 4| 6| 6| 3|11|10| 8| 3| 8|16| 8|..| 3|
                                    |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
_Doubtful reactions_................| 1| 2| 4| 1| 1| 2| 2| 3| 1| 2| 5| 3| 3| 7|..| 6|..|..|
                                    |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
_Individual reactions:_             |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
  Normal reactions..................|..| 2| 1| 4|..| 3| 1| 6| 5| 4| 3| 4| 3|14| 2| 4| 8| 3|
  Derivatives of stimulus words.....|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..| 1| 1|..|
  Non-specific Reactions............|..|..|..|..|..|..| 1|..|..|..|..|..|..|..| 1| 2|..|..|
  Sound reactions (words)...........|..|..|..| 1|..| 1|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|
  Sound reactions (neologisms)......|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|
  Word complements..................|..|..|..|..|..|..| 1|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|
  Particles of speech...............|..|..|..|..|..|..| 1| 1|..|..|..|..|..| 5| 1| 2|..| 1|
  Association to preceding stimulus.|..|..|..|..| 1|..| 1|..|..|..| 2|..|..|..|..| 1|..|..|
  Association to preceding reaction.|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..| 3|
  Repetition of preceding stimulus..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..| 1|
  Repetition of previous stimulus...|..|..|..|..|..|..| 1|..|..|..|..|..| 1|..|..|..|..|..|
  Repetition of preceding reaction..|..|..|..| 1|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..| 1|..|..|..| 2|
  Repetition of previous reaction...|..|..|..|..| 1|..| 1|..| 1|..|..|..| 2| 1| 2| 3| 1| 2|
  Reaction repeated five times......|..|..|..|..| 4|..|..|..|..| 2| 2| 4|..| 4|..|..|..| 3|
  Neologisms without sound relation.|..|..|..|..|..| 1| 1|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|..|
  Unclassified......................|..| 2| 4|..| 1| 3| 1| 6|..| 2| 3| 4| 8|14| 6| 2| 8| 5|
                                    +--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
    Total individual reactions        0  4  5  6  7  8  9 13  6  8 10 12 14 39 12 15 18 20


CASE No. 4818.--S.M. Normal record.

Table--wood.............
Dark--black.............
Music--noise............
Sickness--illness.......
Man--being..............
Deep--depth.............
Soft--mushy.............
Eating--devouring.......
Mountain--hill..........
House--residence........
Black--color............
Mutton--meat............
Comfort--luxury.........
Hand--body..............
Short--abrupt...........19
Fruit--oranges..........
Butterfly--insect.......
Smooth--even............
Command--order..........
Chair--article.......... 1
Sweet--taste............
Whistle--noise..........
Woman--sex..............
Cold--temperature.......
Slow--dull..............
Wish--desire............
River--water............
White--color............
Beautiful--sky..........
Window--glass...........
Rough--uneven...........
Citizen--representative.17
Foot--end...............19
Spider--insect..........
Needle--instrument......
Red--color..............
Sleep--repose...........
Anger--temper...........
Carpet--rug.............
Girl--sex...............
High--elevation.........
Working--employment.....
Sour--bitter............
Earth--clay.............
Trouble--anxiety........
Soldier--military.......
Cabbage--vegetable......
Hard--substance.........
Eagle--bird.............
Stomach--body...........
Stem--flower............
Lamp--light.............
Dream--imagination......
Yellow--color...........
Bread--wheat............
Justice--credit.........17
Boy--child..............
Light--sun..............
Health--condition.......
Bible--book.............
Memory--remembrance.....
Sheep--lamb.............
Bath--bathing...........
Cottage--house..........
Swift--rapid............
Blue--color.............
Hungry--desire..........
Priest--minister........
Ocean--water............
Head--body..............
Stove--fire.............
Long--distance..........
Religion--creed.........
Whiskey--liquor.........
Child--infant...........
Bitter--sour............
Hammer--tool............
Thirsty--dry............
City--town..............
Square--block...........
Butter--food............
Doctor--physician.......
Loud--noisy.............
Thief--burglar..........
Lion--animal............
Joy--happiness.......... 1
Bed--cot................
Heavy--weight...........
Tobacco--weed...........
Baby--infant............
Moon--light.............
Scissors--instrument....
Quiet--noiseless........
Green--color............
Salt--seasoning.........
Street--block...........
King--ruler.............
Cheese--food............
Blossom--flower.........
Afraid--fear............


CASE No. 6207.--T.S. No individual reactions; 13 non-specific
reactions.

Table--furniture......
Dark--color...........
Music--fiddle.........
Sickness--bed.........
Man--person........... 1
Deep--water...........
Soft--pliable.........
Eating--cake..........
Mountain--high........
House--bricks.........
Black--color..........
Mutton--meat..........
Comfort--easy.........
Hand--limb............
Short--small.......... 1
Fruit--vegetable......
Butterfly--insect.....
Smooth--level.........
Command--control......
Chair--sit............
Sweet--nice........... 1
Whistle--noise........
Woman--person......... 1
Cold--atmosphere......
Slow--easy............
Wish--something.......
River--stream.........
White--color..........
Beautiful--nice....... 1
Window--glass.........
Rough--unpleasant..... 1
Citizen--person....... 1
Foot--limb............
Spider--insect........
Needle--instrument....
Red--color............
Sleep--bed............
Anger--irritable......
Carpet--rug...........
Girl--person.......... 1
High--elevation.......
Working--try.......... 2
Sour--bitter..........
Earth--sand...........
Trouble--anxiety......
Soldier--person....... 1
Cabbage--plant........
Hard--stone...........
Eagle--bird...........
Stomach--person....... 1
Stem--apple...........
Lamp--light...........
Dream--sleep..........
Yellow--color.........
Bread--flour..........
Justice--Equal........
Boy--child............
Light--gas............
Health--doctor........
Bible--Scripture......
Memory--thought....... 1
Sheep--animal.........
Bath--water...........
Cottage--house........
Swift--quick..........
Blue--color...........
Hungry--want..........
Priest--preach........
Ocean--water..........
Head--person.......... 1
Stove--heat...........
Long--length..........
Religion--belief......
Whiskey--drink........
Child--person......... 1
Bitter--sour..........
Hammer--tool..........
Thirsty--dry..........
City--place...........
Square--shape.........
Butter--eat...........
Doctor--physician.....
Loud--hear............
Thief--steal..........
Lion--animal..........
Joy--glad.............
Bed--sleep............
Heavy--weight.........
Tobacco--plant........
Baby--child...........
Moon--light...........
Scissors--tool........
Quiet--rest...........
Green--color..........
Salt--spice...........
Street--place.........
King--ruler...........
Cheese--eat...........
Blossom--flower.......
Afraid--hide..........


CASE No. 5719.--A.W.S. 5 individual reactions; 12 non-specific
reactions.

Table--stand..........
Dark--color...........
Music--happy.......... 1
Sickness--ill.........
Man--human............
Deep--thought......... 1
Soft--touch...........
Eating--appetite......
Mountain--ground......
House--shelter........
Black--color..........
Mutton--lamb..........
Comfort--warm.........
Hand--touch...........
Short--small.......... 1
Fruit--taste..........
Butterfly--beauty..... 1
Smooth--level.........
Command--obey.........
Chair--rest...........
Sweet--good...........
Whistle--noise........
Woman--female.........
Cold--chilled......... 2
Slow--move............
Wish--think........... 1
River--water..........
White--color..........
Beautiful--nice....... 1
Window--glass.........
Rough--push...........
Citizen--man.......... 1
Foot--body............
Spider--insect........
Needle--pointed.......
Red--blood............
Sleep--rest...........
Anger--riled..........
Carpet--covering......
Girl--child...........
High--air.............
Working--ambitious....
Sour--taste...........
Earth--ground.........
Trouble--thought...... 1
Soldier--command......
Cabbage--vegetable....
Hard--blow............17
Eagle--bird...........
Stomach--body.........
Stem--pipe............
Lamp--light...........
Dream--thought........ 1
Yellow--purple........
Bread--food...........
Justice--law..........
Boy--male.............
Light--lamp...........
Health--soul..........19
Bible--Scriptures.....
Memory--thought....... 1
Sheep--lamb...........
Bath--cleanness.......
Cottage--house........
Swift--quick..........
Blue--color...........
Hungry--appetite......
Priest--scholar....... 2
Ocean--water..........
Head--brains..........
Stove--heat...........
Long--measurement..... 2
Religion--good........ 1
Whiskey--alcohol......
Child--baby...........
Bitter--taste.........
Hammer--knock.........
Thirsty--water........
City--New York........
Square--box...........
Butter--milk..........
Doctor--help..........
Loud--noise...........
Thief--burglar........
Lion--animal..........
Joy--well.............19
Bed--rest.............
Heavy--load...........
Tobacco--nicotine.....
Baby--joy.............
Moon--light...........
Scissors--cutting.....
Quiet--rest...........
Green--color..........
Salt--sand............19
Street--crossing...... 2
King--ruler...........
Cheese--luxury........19
Blossom--flower.......
Afraid--fright........


CASE No. 5635. J.D. 13 individual reactions, of which 6 are classed
as normal, 1 particle, 6 unclassified, mostly obviously normal.

Table--eating.........
Dark--night...........
Music--amusement......
Sickness--distress....
Man--working..........
Deep--sorrow..........
Soft--easy............
Eating--supper........17
Mountain--pleasure.... 1
House--home...........
Black--grief..........19
Mutton--butchers...... 2
Comfort--home.........
Hand--shake...........
Short--baseball.......19
Fruit--eating.........
Butterfly--field......
Smooth--soft..........
Command--oblige.......17
Chair--seat...........
Sweet--flowers........
Whistle--fire.........
Woman--home...........
Cold--winter..........
Slow--easy............
Wish--home............
River--dock...........17
Whiter--day...........
Beautiful--handsome...
Window--glass.........
Rough--wagon..........19
Citizen--voter........
Foot--walking.........
Spider--web...........
Needle--sticking......19
Red--danger...........
Sleep--rest...........
Anger--right..........19
Carpet--house.........
Girl--out.............12
High--air.............
Working--labor........
Sour--bitter..........
Earth--ground.........
Trouble--worry........
Soldier--man.......... 1
Cabbage--farmer....... 2
Hard--bath............19
Eagle--birds..........
Stomach--body.........
Stem--pipe............
Lamp--burn............
Dream--thinking....... 1
Yellow--color.........
Bread--eating.........
Justice--peace........
Boy--soldier..........17
Light--day............
Health--happy......... 1
Bible--books..........
Memory--good.......... 1
Sheep--lamb...........
Bath--washing.........
Cottage--house........
Swift--quick..........
Blue--color...........
Hungry--eating........
Priest--church........
Ocean--bathing........
Head--mind............
Stove--fire...........
Long--hours...........
Religion--church......
Whiskey--drinking.....
Child--home...........
Bitter--sour..........
Hammer--working.......
Thirsty--dry..........
City--New York........
Square--block.........
Butter--cow...........
Doctor--hospital......
Loud--speaking........ 2
Thief--sentence.......17
Lion--animal..........
Joy--pleasure......... 1
Bed--sleeping.........
Heavy--weight.........
Tobacco--smoking......
Baby--home............
Moon--night...........
Scissors--cutting.....
Quiet--alone..........
Green--color..........
Salt--eating..........
Street--walking.......
King--William.........17
Cheese--milk..........
Blossom--flower.......
Afraid--fright........


Our cases of _alcoholic_ dementia are clinically without
evidences of disturbance of flow of thought. The dementia consists
mainly in impairment or loss of the power of retention, with resulting
amnesia for recent occurrences, and temporal disorientation. The
records are either normal or show but slight departures from normal.


CASE No. 6369.--J.S. Slight deterioration.

Table--eat............
Dark--night...........
Music--enjoyment......
Sickness--sadness.....
Man--work............. 1
Deep--hole............
Soft--feathers........
Eating--appetite......
Mountain--hill........
House--live...........
Black--dark...........
Mutton--eat...........
Comfort--pleasant..... 1
Hand--work............ 1
Short--story..........
Fruit--eat............
Butterfly--annoyance.. 6
Smooth--iron..........
Command--officer......
Chair--sit............
Sweet--nice........... 1
Whistle--pleasure..... 1
Woman--pleasure....... 1
Cold--annoyance....... 6
Slow--car.............
Wish--like............
River--water..........
White--sack...........17
Beautiful--house......17
Window--look..........
Rough--unpleasant..... 1
Citizen--man.......... 1
Foot--walk............
Spider--annoyance.....
Needle--sticking......19
Red--color............
Sleep--happy.......... 1
Anger--annoyance......
Carpet--walk..........
Girl--school..........
High--skies...........
Working--labor........
Sour--lemon...........
Earth--walk...........
Trouble--annoyance....
Soldier--army.........
Cabbage--eat..........
Hard--stone...........
Eagle--fly............
Stomach--victuals.....17
Stem--pipe............
Lamp--burn............
Dream--sleep..........
Yellow--orange........
Bread--eat............
Justice--person....... 1
Boy--school...........
Light--see............
Health--comfort.......
Bible--read...........
Memory--recollection..
Sheep--eat............
Bath--cleanness.......
Cottage--live.........
Swift--go.............
Blue--color...........
Hungry--eat...........
Priest--confession....
Ocean--vessels........ 2
Head--knowledge.......
Stove--burn...........
Long--time............
Religion--faith.......
Whiskey--drink........
Child--infant.........
Bitter--unkind........17
Hammer--nail..........
Thirsty--dry..........
City--inhabitants.....

Square--brick.........
Butter--eat...........
Doctor--cure..........
Loud--noise...........
Thief--steal..........
Lion--animal..........
Joy--happiness........ 1
Bed--lay..............
Heavy--feeling........ 2
Tobacco--chew.........
Baby--nurse...........
Moon--bright..........
Scissors--cut.........
Quiet--ease...........
Green--flower.........
Salt--taste...........
Street--walking.......
King--control.........19
Cheese--eat...........
Blossom--flower.......
Afraid--nervousness...



CASE No. 6418.--J.R. Marked deterioration.

Table--mahogany.......
Dark--dawn............17
Music--harp...........17
Sickness--none........ 6
Man--white............19
Deep--unfathomable.... 2
Soft--silken.......... 2
Eating--good.......... 1
Mountain--high........
House--place..........
Black--color..........
Mutton--cooked........17
Comfort--rest.........
Hand--clasp...........19
Short--small.......... 1
Fruit--apples.........
Butterfly--buttercups. 2
Smooth--iron..........
Command--home.........19
Chair--ebony..........19
Sweet--potatoes.......17
Whistle--song.........
Woman--pretty......... 1
Cold--depressed.......19
Slow--process.........17
Wish--home............
River--Mississippi....
White--wings..........17
Beautiful--palace.....19
Window--clear.........
Rough--no.............12
Citizen--patriot......
Foot--heath...........19
Spider--none.......... 5
Needle--darning.......
Red--apples...........
Sleep--plenty.........
Anger--mistake........17
Carpet--floor.........
Girl--pretty.......... 1
High--ordinary........19
Working--eight........12
Sour--nonsense........19
Earth--fruits......... 2
Trouble--little.......
Soldier--patriot......
Cabbage--garden.......
Hard--wood............
Eagle--high...........

Stomach--leave........19
Stem--stalk...........
Lamp--kerosene........
Dream--happy.......... 1
Yellow--aster.........17
Bread--white..........
Justice--right........
Boy--white............15
Light--white..........
Health--good.......... 1
Bible--puzzled........19
Memory--bad........... 1
Sheep--cheviot........17
Bath--marble..........17
Cottage--story........17
Swift--fast...........
Blue--waist...........17
Hungry--not........... 2
Priest--confessor.....
Ocean--Pacific........17
Head--oval............19
Stove--polish.........
Long--forever.........12
Religion--Protestant..
Whiskey--none.........
Child--none........... 5
Bitter--sweet.........
Hammer--no............12
Thirsty--no........... 5
City--New York........
Square--compass.......
Butter--sweet.........
Doctor--cure..........
Loud--quietly......... 2
Thief--jail...........
Lion--brave,..........
Joy--peacefulness..... 2
Bed--good............. 1
Heavy--no.............
Tobacco--yes..........12
Baby--none............ 6
Moon--shines..........
Scissors--uncut....... 2
Quiet--peaceful.......
Green--grass..........
Salt--water...........
Street--Queen.........17
King--unknown.........19
Cheese--Stilton.......17
Blossom--cherry.......
Afraid--not...........



We reproduce in full the record obtained from one of our cases of
_senile dementia._


CASE No. 5788.--E.S.

Table--cat............ 6
Dark--night...........
Music--cat............ 2
Sickness--cat......... 6
Man--mouse............18
Deep--well............
Soft--sack............19
Eating--well..........
Mountain--hill........
House--castle.........
Black--dog............
Mutton--sheep.........
Comfort--lamb.........13
Hand--chicken.........18
Short--light..........19
Fruit--apple..........
Butterfly--fly........
Smooth--iron..........
Command--obey.........
Chair--stool..........
Sweet--sugar..........
Whistle--lump.........18
Woman--man............ 1
Cold--shiver..........
Slow--cold............ 7
Wish--push............19
River--pond...........
White--cat............
Beautiful--cat........ 6
Window--glass.........
Rough--fight..........19
Citizen--tough........
Foot--shoe............
Spider--clock.........19
Needle--pin...........
Red--white............
Sleep--eyes...........
Anger--mad............
Carpet--cloth.........
Girl--boy.............
High--low.............
Working--sewing.......
Sour--sweet...........
Earth--clay...........
Trouble--child........13
Soldier--man.......... 1
Cabbage--spinach......
Hard--cat............. 6
Eagle--bird...........
Stomach--belly........
Stem--pike............17
Lamp--globe...........
Dream--eyes...........
Yellow--flower........
Bread--flour..........
Justice--fight........
Boy--cat.............. 6
Light--lamp...........
Health--cough.........17
Bible--book...........
Memory--mind..........
Sheep--lamb...........
Bath--water...........
Cottage--house........
Swift--quick..........
Blue--color...........
Hungry--eat...........
Priest--clergyman.....
Ocean--river..........
Head--life............
Stove--fire...........
Long--short...........
Religion--Catholic....
Whiskey--drink........
Child--boy............
Bitter--sweet.........
Hammer--noise.........
Thirsty--drink........
City--New York........
Square--Marion........17
Butter--cow...........
Doctor--W.............17
Loud--noise...........
Thief--steals.........
Lion--heart...........
Joy--happy............ 1
Bed--mattress.........
Heavy--lead...........
Tobacco--smoke........
Baby--boy.............
Moon--shine...........
Scissors--cut.........
Quiet--noisy..........
Green--color..........
Salt--bitter..........
Street--place.........
King--rule............
Cheese--taste.........
Blossom--flower.......
Afraid--trouble.......



§8. PATHOLOGICAL REACTIONS FROM NORMAL SUBJECTS.

Mental disorders do not always so manifest themselves as to
incapacitate the subject for his work or to necessitate his
sequestration in a hospital for the insane. It is, therefore, not
surprising that in applying the association test to over a thousand
subjects selected at random we have obtained a small number of test
records which show various types of abnormal reactions. Among the
subjects who furnished such records some are described as eccentric,
taciturn, or dull, while others are apparently normal but come of
neuropathic stock. A few of them are persons wholly unknown to us.

We reproduce in full from the normal series, containing abnormal
reactions.


CONSECUTIVE No. 746.--State hospital attendant Efficient in his work
but is generally regarded to have married very foolishly. Sound
reactions; numerous unclassified reactions.

Table--brought........19
Dark--some............19
Music--leaf...........19
Sickness--water.......19
Man--book.............19
Deep--desk............19
Soft--ground..........
Eating--bark..........19
Mountain--tree........
House--paper..........19
Black--light..........
Mutton--horse.........13
Comfort--hat..........19
Hand--sick............13
Short--swallow........19
Fruit--mass...........19
Butterfly--leaf.......15
Smooth--wing..........13
Command--man.......... 1
Chair--left...........19
Sweet--sick........... 2
Whistle--whirl........10
Woman--where..........12
Cold--coal............
Slow--some............15
Wish--whirl...........15
River--rice...........19
White--waist..........
Beautiful--brought....15
Window--women.........10
Rough--row............19
Citizen--sir..........10
Foot--fall............19
Spider--spice.........10
Needle--knee..........10
Red--roam.............19
Sleep--sorrow.........19
Anger--August.........19
Carpet--covered....... 2
Girl--great........... 9
High--his.............12
Working--map..........19
Sour--slur............10
Earth--eat............19
Trouble--through......12
Soldier--solder.......10
Cabbage--cart.........19
Hard--him.............12
Eagle--earth..........13
Stomach--stall........10
Stem--stair...........10
Lamp--left............19
Dream--dread..........
Yellow--waist.........15
Bread--book...........15
Justice--gem..........19
Boy--bird.............19
Light--left...........10
Health--heart.........17
Bible--base...........19
Memory--moth..........19
Sheep--shrill.........19
Bath--bend............19

Cottage--cart.........10
Swift--swell..........10
Blue--beard...........11
Hungry--heart.........15
Priest--path..........19
Ocean--oar............10
Head--him.............12
Stove--still..........10
Long--left............15
Religion--rest........19
Whiskey--whirl........15
Child--charge.........19
Bitter--bought........10
Hammer--hemp..........10
Thirsty--Thursday.....10
City--salt............10
Square--squirrel......10
Butter--bread.........
Doctor--daisy.........19
Loud--lark............19
Thief--twist..........19
Lion--lesson..........10
Joy--jar..............19
Bed--beard............10
Heavy--health.........10
Tobacco--toboggan.....10
Baby--bird............15
Moon--mill............19
Scissors--setters.....10
Quiet--quart..........10
Green--great.......... 9
Salt--sorrow..........10
Street--stem..........10
King--cart............15
Cheese--chart.........19
Blossom--bed..........19
Afraid--frill.........10



CONSECUTIVE No. 220--Laundryman in State hospital. Nothing abnormal
has ever been observed in his case. Numerous perseverations.

Table--house..........
Dark--range...........19
Music--eats...........
Sickness--dog.........18
Man--barn.............19
Deep--hollow..........
Soft--apple...........
Eating--cranberry.....17
Mountain--water.......17
House--pig............19
Black--rats...........18
Mutton--mice.......... 2
Comfort--sheep........13
Hand--lamb............14
Short--birds..........19
Fruit--peach..........
Butterfly--pears......18
Smooth--grapes........18
Command--nut..........18
Chair--bureau.........
Sweet--broom..........19
Whistle--violin.......19
Woman--man............ 1
Cold--child...........10
Slow--infant..........14
Wish--night...........19
River--dark...........14
White--steamboat......17
Beautiful--tugboat....18
Window--yacht.........18
Rough--ferry..........18
Citizen--water........13
Foot--egg.............19
Spider--fly...........
Needle--thread........
Red--spool............18
Sleep--machine........18
Anger--picture........19
Carpet--bed...........17
Girl--bureau..........18
High--oilcloth........18
Working--pen..........19
Sour--ink.............18
Earth--paper..........18
Trouble--chair........19
Soldier--table........14
Cabbage--beet.........
Hard--cauliflower.....13
Eagle--potatoes.......18
Stomach--beans........17
Stem--plum............17
Lamp--wick............
Dream--oil............13
Yellow--stick.........19
Bread--stone..........18
Justice--dirt.........18
Boy--street...........
Light--match..........
Health--sickness......
Bible--book...........
Memory--leaf..........13
Sheep--wool...........
Bath--water...........
Cottage--people....... 1
Swift--fast...........
Blue--residence.......19
Hungry--beef..........17
Priest--clergyman.....
Ocean--rice...........19
Head--eyes............
Stove--nose...........18
Long--mouth...........18
Religion--legs........18
Whiskey--arms.........18
Child--elbows.........18
Bitter--day...........19
Hammer--nails.........
Thirsty--saw..........13
City--plane...........18
Square--chisel........18
Butter--file..........18
Doctor--duck..........10
Loud--goose...........18
Thief--robber.........
Lion--tiger...........
Joy--bear.............13
Bed--leopard..........18
Heavy--tiger..........15
Tobacco--smoke........
Baby--pipe............13
Moon--star............
Scissors--sharp.......
Quiet--noisy..........
Green--blue...........
Salt--yellow..........13
Street--green.........14
King--purple..........14
Cheese--axe...........19
Blossom--handle.......19
Afraid--barn..........19



CONSECUTIVE No. 255.--State hospital attendant. Efficient, but
unusually taciturn and seclusive. Sound reactions.

Table--linen..........
Dark--sunshine........17
Music--song...........
Sickness--Saturday....19
Man--manager..........10
Deep--dark............
Soft--sorrowful.......10
Eating--eighty........10
Mountain--miner.......19
House--heart..........19
Black--blue...........
Mutton--mountain......10
Comfort--company......17
Hand--happy...........10
Short--slow...........17
Fruit--froth..........10
Butterfly--butter.....10
Smooth--smoke.........10
Command--company......
Chair--chap...........10
Sweet--slow...........15
Whistle--whip.........10
Woman--worried........19
Cold--cow.............10
Slow--slap............10
Wish--water...........
River--rubbed.........19
White--wash...........
Beautiful--bounty.....10
Window--light.........
Rough--roguish........19
Citizen--sight-seeing.19
Foot--fool............10
Spider--span..........10
Needle--work.......... 1
Red--robe.............19
Sleep--soap...........10
Anger--angel..........19
Carpet--carriage......19
Girl--guide...........19
High--heart...........10
Working--worthy.......10
Sour--satchel.........19
Earth--early..........10
Trouble--trout........19
Soldier--socket.......19
Cabbage--currant......17
Hard--harmful.........10
Eagle--early..........15
Stomach--stable.......19
Stem--stand...........10
Lamp--light...........
Dream--drunk..........10
Yellow--lustre........19
Bread--brand..........10
Justice--judgment.....
Boy--butter...........15
Light--love...........19
Health--help..........10
Bible--book...........
Memory--mental........
Sheep--shop...........10
Bath--bandage.........10
Cottage--cot..........10
Swift--swan...........10
Blue--black...........10
Hungry--height........19
Priest--house.........
Ocean--apple..........19
Head--heart...........
Stove--strap..........10
Long--love............15
Religion--belief......
Whiskey--whisk broom..10
Child--chap...........10
Bitter--butter........10
Hammer--habit.........19
Thirsty--thirty.......10
City--soap............15
Square--squirrel......10
Butter--bank..........19
Doctor--dentist.......
Loud--laugh...........
Thief--thump..........19
Lion--lump............19
Joy--jump.............19
Bed--bank.............15
Heavy--happy..........10
Tobacco--tub..........19
Baby--bundle..........
Moon--mantle..........10
Scissors--Saturday....15
Quiet--quarter........10
Green--drought........19
Salt--Saturday........10
Street--straight......
King--cattle..........19
Cheese--captain.......19
Blossom--bandage......15
Afraid--flattered.....10


CONSECUTIVE No. 442.--Nothing abnormal has ever been suspected in the
case of this subject; mother eccentric; sister insane. Sound
reactions.

Table--stable.........
Dark--dreary..........
Music--joy............
Sickness--silliness...10
Man--manner...........10
Deep--dreary..........15
Soft--sooth...........19
Eating--evening.......10
Mountain--morning.....18
House--help...........19
Black--dark...........
Mutton--mitten........10
Comfort--come.........10
Hand--handsome........10
Short--small.......... 1
Fruit--first..........10
Butterfly--butter.....10
Smooth--sooth.........10
Command--come.........
Chair--air............10
Sweet--good........... 1
Whistle--music........
Woman--wonder.........19
Cold--freezing........
Slow--snow............10
Wish--wind............10
River--riffle......... 3
White--wait...........10
Beautiful--handsome...
Window--light.........
Rough--harsh..........
Citizen--city.........
Foot--walk............
Spider--creep.........
Needle--needless......10
Red--color............
Sleep--sleet..........10
Anger--rough..........
Carpet--carpenter.....10
Girl--going...........19
High--air.............
Working--toiling......
Sour--shower..........10
Earth--eating.........19
Trouble--loneliness...17
Soldier--solid........10
Cabbage--carrying.....19
Hard--hardly.......... 8
Eagle--eating.........10
Stomach--starch.......10
Stem--step............ 2
Lamp--glass...........
Dream--dreary.........
Yellow--yonder........12
Bread--bed............10
Justice--juice........10
Boy--ball.............
Light--likeness.......10
Health--help..........10
Bible--book...........
Memory--memorial...... 2
Sheep--sleep..........
Bath--battle..........10
Cottage--cotton.......10
Swift--fast...........
Blue--blind...........10
Hungry--hurry.........10
Priest--prince........10
Ocean--over...........12
Head--large........... 1
Stove--stone..........10
Long--heavy...........19
Religion--goodness.... 1
Whiskey--strong.......
Child--small.......... 1
Bitter--butter........10
Hammer--hard..........
Thirsty--thrifty......10
City--seeing..........10
Square--squirrel......10
Butter--bitter........10
Doctor--dark..........10
Loud--noisy...........
Thief--stealing.......
Lion--eating..........
Joy--joyous........... 8
Bed--sleep............
Heavy--weightful...... 4
Tobacco--cocoa........10
Baby--boys............ 2
Moon--moo............. 3
Scissors--successors..10
Quiet--easy...........
Green--grass..........
Salt--simmer..........19
Street--steep.........10
King--kingdom.........
Cheese--squeeze.......10
Blossom--blooming.....
Afraid--Africa........10


CONSECUTIVE No. 3l4.--School teacher. Efficient; described as very
silent. Unclassified reactions, due mostly to distraction.

Table--cat............19
Dark--no..............12
Music--will...........19
Sickness--chair.......19
Man--table............ 6
Deep--floor...........14
Soft--paper........... 6
Eating--wood..........19
Mountain--chair.......15
House--Window.........
Black--wall...........
Mutton--sky...........19
Comfort--air..........18
Hand--table...........
Short--paper.......... 6
Fruit--sweeping.......19
Butterfly--room.......18
Smooth--working....... 2
Command--stone........19
Chair--machine........19
Sweet--radiator.......19
Whistle--clock........19
Woman--cane...........19
Cold--flower..........19
Slow--cord............19
Wish--marriage........ 2
River--chimney........19
White--wheel..........19
Beautiful--cane.......15
Window--pot...........19
Rough--grass..........19
Citizen--paper........
Foot--closet..........19
Spider--awning........19
Needle--good.......... 9
Red--bad.............. 9
Sleep--hinge..........19
Anger--will...........15
Carpet--paper......... 6
Girl--chair...........15
High--table........... 6
Working--cane.........15
Sour--floor...........15
Earth--ceiling........18
Trouble--chain........19
Soldier--desk.........19
Cabbage--paper........
Hard--table...........
Eagle--flower.........15
Stomach--match........19
Stem--match...........
Lamp--table...........
Dream--chair..........14
Yellow--cane..........18
Bread--flour..........
Justice--peace........
Boy--window...........15
Light--wall...........18
Health--floor.........18
Bible--house..........18
Memory--paper......... 6
Sheep--dress..........19
Bath--clothes.........18
Cottage--earth........19
Swift--sky............18
Blue--trees...........19
Hungry--leaves........18
Priest--bark..........18
Ocean--boat...........
Head--hat.............
Stove--ashes..........17
Long--short...........
Religion--peace.......
Whiskey--bottle.......
Child--dress..........
Bitter--sour..........
Hammer--teeth.........19
Thirsty--dry..........
City--good............ 1
Square--wood..........
Butter--best..........10
Doctor--shoes.........19
Loud--music...........
Thief--notes.......... 2
Lion--strings.........19
Joy--happy............ 1
Bed--wish.............13
Heavy--lead...........
Tobacco--plant........
Baby--good............ 1
Moon--paper........... 6
Scissors--straw.......19
Quiet--hoop...........19
Green--rope...........19
Salt--dish............
Street--dirt..........
King--bucket..........19
Cheese--plate.........
Blossom--plant........
Afraid--sweeping......15


CONSECUTIVE No. 216.--State hospital attendant. Incompetent, dull.
Numerous non-specific reactions.

Table--rolling........19
Dark--swim............19
Music--playing........
Sickness--riding......19
Man--walk.............
Deep--singing.........19
Soft--light...........
Eating--sleep.........
Mountain--low.........
House--small.......... 1
Black--dark...........
Mutton--lean..........19
Comfort--good......... 1
Hand--small........... 1
Short--small.......... 1
Fruit--taste..........
Butterfly--beautiful.. 1
Smooth--long.......... 6
Command--immediate.... 2
Chair--small.......... 6
Sweet--clear..........19
Whistle--long.........
Woman--small.......... 1
Cold--long............ 6
Slow--write........... 2
Wish--quick...........10
River--long...........
White--clean..........
Beautiful--nice....... 1
Window--big...........19
Rough--bad............ 1
Citizen--short........19
Foot--small........... 1
Spider--small......... 1
Needle--small......... 1
Red--dark.............
Sleep--easy...........
Anger--bad............ 1
Carpet--small......... 1
Girl--short...........15
High--long............
Working--good......... 1
Sour--bad............. 1
Earth--large.......... 1
Trouble--bad.......... 1
Soldier--good......... 1
Cabbage--small........ 6
Hard--apples..........
Eagle--small.......... 6
Stomach--good......... 1
Stem--short...........
Lamp--bright..........
Dream--good........... 1
Yellow--light.........
Bread--good........... 1
Justice--good......... 1
Boy--small............ 1
Light--clear..........
Health--good.......... 1
Bible--true...........
Memory--good.......... 1
Sheep--many...........
Bath--good............ 1
Cottage--large........ 1
Swift--fast...........
Blue--dark............
Hungry--long.......... 6
Priest--true..........19
Ocean--wide...........
Head--large........... 1
Stove--black..........
Long--wide............
Religion--good........ 1
Whiskey--strong.......
Child--small.......... 1
Bitter--bad........... 1
Hammer--small......... 1
Thirsty--bad.......... 1
City--big.............
Square--long..........
Butter--good.......... 1
Doctor--good.......... 1
Loud--hearty..........19
Thief--bad............ 1
Lion--bad............. 5
Joy--happy............ 1
Bed--easy.............
Heavy--stone..........
Tobacco--strong.......
Baby--small........... 1
Moon--large........... 1
Scissors--sharp.......
Quiet--baby...........
Green--dark...........
Salt--strong..........10
Street--wide..........
King--high............
Cheese--good.......... 1
Blossom--apples.......
Afraid--he............12


CONSECUTIVE No. 318.--School boy. Non-specific reactions.

Table--board..........
Dark--night...........
Music--sound..........
Sickness--pleasantness 9
Man--people........... 1
Deep--river...........
Soft--cat............. 2
Eating--pleasantness.. 1
Mountain--high........
House--home...........
Black--dark...........
Mutton--good.......... 1
Comfort--pleasure..... 1
Hand--foot............
Short--little.........
Fruit--good........... 1
Butterfly--pretty..... 1
Smooth--soft..........
Command--go...........
Chair--sit............
Sweet--good........... 1
Whistle--noise........
Woman--pretty......... 1
Cold--bad............. 1
Slow--quick...........
Wish--good............ 1
River--deep...........
White--snow...........
Beautiful--pretty..... 1
Window--look..........
Rough--even...........
Citizen--good......... 1
Foot--hand............
Spider--bite..........
Needle--sharp.........
Red--crimson..........
Sleep--wake...........
Anger--mad............
Carpet--floor.........

Girl--good............ 1
High--tall............
Working--sleep........
Sour--bad............. 1
Earth--ground.........
Trouble--bad.......... 1
Soldier--good......... 1
Cabbage--bad.......... 6
Hard--soft............
Eagle--bird...........
Stomach--ache.........
Stem--slender.........
Lamp--light...........
Dream--good........... 1
Yellow--pretty........ 1
Bread--good........... 1
Justice--good......... 1
Boy--fun..............
Light--see............
Health--happiness..... 1
Bible--good........... 1
Memory--good.......... 1
Sheep--pretty......... 1
Bath--good............ 1
Cottage--pretty....... 1
Swift--quick..........
Blue--yellow..........
Hungry--eat...........
Priest--good..........
Ocean--big............
Head--little..........15
Stove--hot............
Long--distance........
Religion--good........ 1
Whiskey--bad.......... 1
Child--cute...........
Bitter--good.......... 1
Hammer--hard..........
Thirsty--hard......... 5
City--good............ 6
Square--round.........
Butter--soft..........
Doctor--good.......... 1
Loud--noisy...........
Thief--good........... 6
Lion--big.............
Joy--good............. 1
Bed--comfortable......
Heavy--light..........
Tobacco--bad.......... 1
Baby--pretty.......... 1
Moon--cute............13
Scissors--sharp.......
Quiet--loud...........
Green--pretty......... 1
Salt--good............ 1
Street--narrow........
King--good............ 6
Cheese--good.......... 1
Blossom--pretty....... 1
Afraid--scared........


CONSECUTIVE NO. 234.--School boy. Non-specific reactions.

Table--chair..........
Dark--cold............
Music--sweet..........
Sickness--hard........
Man--wise.............19
Deep--dark............
Soft--sweet...........
Eating--drinking......
Mountain--snow........
House--great.......... 9
Black--horse..........
Mutton--good.......... 1
Comfort--health.......
Hand--foot............
Short--fat............
Fruit--good........... 1
Butterfly--pretty.....
Smooth--hard..........
Command--general......
Chair--soft...........
Sweet--good........... 1
Whistle--loud.........
Woman--large.......... 1
Cold--dreary..........
Slow--hard............
Wish--fairy...........
River--large.......... 1
White--snow...........
Beautiful--woman...... 1
Window--large......... 1
Rough--hard...........
Citizen--good......... 1
Foot--small........... 1
Spider--ugly..........
Needle--thick.........
Red--cow..............17
Sleep--dreams.........
Anger--very...........12
Carpet--pretty........ 1
Girl--small........... 1
High--tree............
Working--hard.........
Sour--bitter..........
Earth--great.......... 1
Trouble--hard.........
Soldier--brave........
Cabbage--good......... 1
Hard--stone...........
Eagle--great.......... 9
Stomach--weak.........
Stem--watch...........
Lamp--pretty.......... 9
Dream--sweet..........
Yellow--buttercup.....
Bread--flour..........
Justice--man.......... 1
Boy--gun..............
Light--bright.........
Health--care.......... 2
Bible--holy...........
Memory--poor..........
Sheep--pretty......... 1
Bath--nice............ 1
Cottage--low..........
Swift--stream.........
Blue--bluebird........ 2
Hungry--tired.........
Priest--church........
Ocean--water..........
Head--large........... 1
Stove--fire...........
Long--snake...........
Religion--Jesus.......
Whiskey--temperance...
Child--healthy........19
Bitter--apple.........
Hammer--nail..........
Thirsty--water........
City--houses..........
Square--desk..........
Butter--yellow........
Doctor--medicine......
Loud--harse...........
Thief--wicked.........
Lion--fierce..........
Joy--happiness........ 1
Bed--rest.............
Heavy--stone..........
Tobacco--dirty........
Baby--small........... 1
Moon--sky.............
Scissors--sharp.......
Quiet--lonely.........
Green--sour...........
Salt--cows............19
Street--people........ 1
King--rich............19
Cheese--yellow........
Blossom--pretty....... 1
Afraid--fear..........


CONSECUTIVE No. 809.--Lawyer. 28 individual reactions, of which 14 are
classed as normal; 10 are unclassified, most of which are also
obviously normal.

Table--chair.............
Dark--candle............ 17
Music--girl..............
Sickness--doctor.........
Man--woman............... 1
Deep--swimming...........19
Soft--hand...............
Eating--Reisenweber......17
Mountain--Kipling........19
House--mortgage..........17
Black--spectrum..........19
Mutton--pig..............
Comfort--chair...........
Hand--ring...............
Short--tall..............
Fruit--banana............
Butterfly--color.........
Smooth--sphere...........17
Command--soldier.........
Chair--teacher...........10
Sweet--apple.............
Whistle--policeman.......
Woman--hat...............
Cold--thermometer........19
Slow--invalid............
Wish--million............
River--Hudson............
White--Broadway..........19
Beautiful--girl..........
Window--school...........
Rough--ball..............19
Citizen--justice.........
Foot--shoe...............
Spider--insect...........
Needle--tailor...........17
Red--flannel.............
Sleep--potassium bromide.17
Anger--teacher...........
Carpet--tack.............
Girl--belt...............17
High--pole...............
Working--laborer.........
Sour--apple..............
Earth--Columbus..........
Trouble--lawyer..........19
Soldier--gun.............
Cabbage--plantation...... 2
Hard--brick..............
Eagle--feathers..........
Stomach--juice...........17
Stem--leaf...............
Lamp--light..............
Dream--pillow............17
Yellow--lemon............
Bread--crust.............
Justice--judge...........
Boy--pants...............
Light--gas...............
Health--medicine.........
Bible--Jacob.............17
Memory--brain............
Sheep--wool..............
Bath--soap...............
Cottage--rod.............19
Swift--ball..............
Blue--sky................
Hungry--I................
Priest--surplice.........
Ocean--ship..............
Head--hair...............
Stove--shovel............17
Long--pole...............
Religion--Abraham........19
Whiskey--Kentucky........17
Child--baby..............
Bitter--pepper...........
Hammer--nail.............
Thirsty--lemonade........
City--Manhattan..........17
Square--Washington.......
Butter--salt.............
Doctor--nurse............
Loud--hammer.............
Thief--jewelry...........
Lion--Androcles..........18
Joy--automobile..........
Bed--shoes...............15
Heavy--Flannigan.........19
Tobacco--pipe............
Baby--wife...............
Moon--man................ 1
Scissors--cut............
Quiet--demure............
Green--eyes..............
Salt--cellar.............
Street--Wall.............17
King--Edward.............
Cheese--Roquefort........
Blossom--field...........
Afraid--burglar..........



§ 9. NUMBER OF DIFFERENT WORDS GIVEN AS REACTIONS.


It has been suggested by Fuhrmann [1] that the number of different
words given in response to one hundred selected stimulus words may be
used as "a fairly reliable measure of the intelligence and degree of
education of a patient." The test according to Fuhrmann is applied
twice in every case, the interval between the two sittings being at
least four weeks. "In very intelligent and well educated persons every
100 stimulus words almost always evokes in the first test 95-100
different associations; in the less intelligent and in the
feeble-minded the same associations are more frequently repeated. In
the second test with the same stimulus words--which is really much
more important than the first, since even persons or inferior
intelligence may reach higher numbers in the first test--the
difference in the wealth of the stock of representations becomes
plainly evident: the man of intelligence will not need to draw on the
associations which he gave in the first test, but will produce new
ones; the feeble-minded subject will, on the contrary, repeat to a
greater or lesser extent the associations of the first test." "In
general the associational capacity of an adult person may be taken to
be from 80 per cent to 90 per cent. Should the number sink below 70
per cent the suspicion of a pathological condition must then arise;
and the higher the subject's degree of education the stronger is this
suspicion. In the case of an associational capacity of 60 per cent or
less no doubt of its pathological significance can remain any longer."

[Footnote 1: Diagnostik und Prognostik der Geisteskrankheiten,
p. 93. Leipzig, 1903.]

Our results are not strictly comparable with Fuhrmann's, because we
have obtained but one test record from each subject; it may be said,
however, that the results of a single test in each case do not show
any considerable differences, corresponding to education or age, in
the variety of responses. Further, dementing psychoses, with the
exception of epilepsy, show on the whole no diminution in the number
of different reactions, although in individual cases this number falls
considerably below the general average; and in such cases the
diminution may be dependent upon stereotypy or perseveration, and not
necessarily upon reduction in the stock of representations.

It would appear from our results that pathological mental states are
apt to manifest themselves by a tendency to give reactions belonging
to types of inferior values rather than by diminished variety of
responses.

We show in Table VI. the numbers of different responses given by our
groups of normal and insane subjects, expressed in figures giving for
each group the median and the average.


TABLE VI.

                                                         Med.     Av.
86  normal subjects, common school education; records
      containing not over 10 individual reactions........ 85      84.5
66  normal subjects, collegiate education; records
      containing not over 10 individual reactions........ 87      86.5
48  normal subjects, school children; records
      containing not over 10 individual reactions........ 87      84.9
53  normal subjects; records containing not under 15
      individual reactions............................... 90      88.7
108 cases of dementia præcox............................. 87      84.8
33  cases of paranoic conditions......................... 89      86.5
24  cases of epilepsy.................................... 781/2     75.8
32  cases of general paresis............................. 841/2     82.4
32  cases of manic-depressive insanity................... 87      85.4



§ 10. CO-OPERATION OF THE SUBJECT.


In our work with insane subjects we encountered many cases in which we
were unable to obtain satisfactory test records owing to lack of
proper co-operation. Some subjects seemed to be either too confused or
too demented to be capable of understanding and following the
instructions given them. Others were for one reason or another
unwilling to co-operate. It is important to distinguish inability from
unwillingness to co-operate, since the former indicates in itself an
abnormal state of the mind, while the latter is quite often shown by
normal persons.

A subject may co-operate to the extent of giving a single word in
response to each stimulus word, and yet fail to co-operate in some
other particulars.

He may, instead of giving the first word suggested to him by the
stimulus, suppress the first word more or less systematically, and
give some other word which may seem to him more appropriate. This
probably occurs very often, but does not seem to render the results
less serviceable for our purpose.

Further, a subject may react by words related not to the stimulus
words, but to each other, thus simulating perseveration; or he may
react by naming objects within reach of the senses, thus appearing to
be distracted; or he may give only sound reactions.

There is, in fact, no type of pathological reactions which a normal
person may not be able to produce more or less readily at will, though
in the case of incoherent reactions considerable mental effort may be
required, and the end may be attained only by regularly rejecting the
first and some subsequent words which are suggested by the stimulus.

In view of these considerations we are led to conclude that the
association test, as applied by our method, could not be relied upon
as a means of detecting simulation of insanity in malingerers,
criminals, and the like.



§ 11. SUMMARY.


The normal range of reaction in response to any of our stimulus words
is largely confined within narrow limits.

The frequency tables compiled from test records given by one
thousand normal subjects comprise over ninety per cent of the
normal range in the average case.

With the aid of the frequency tables and the appendix normal
reactions, with a very few exceptions, can be sharply distinguished
from pathological ones.

The separation of pathological reactions from normal ones simplifies
the task of their analysis, and makes possible the application of a
classification based on objective criteria.

By the application of the association test, according to the method
here proposed, no sharp distinction can be drawn between mental health
and mental disease; a large collection of material shows a gradual and
not an abrupt transition from the normal state to pathological states.

In dementia præcox, some paranoic conditions, manic-depressive
insanity, general paresis, and epileptic dementia the test reveals
some characteristic, though not pathognomonic, associational
tendencies.



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.


It is with pleasure that we acknowledge our indebtedness to the many
persons who have assisted us in collecting the data for this work.

About two hundred tests upon normal subjects were made for us by the
following persons: Dr. Frederic Lyman Wells, Dr. Jennie A. Dean, Miss
Lillian Rosanoff, and Miss Madeleine Wehle.

Dr. O. M. Dewing, the late superintendent of the Long Island State
Hospital, and Dr. Chas. W. Pilgrim, superintendent of the Hudson River
State Hospital, have assisted the work by kindly permitting the test
to be made upon employees of these institutions, and we are especially
indebted to Dr. F. W. Parsons for personal assistance in securing the
co-operation of many subjects.

Professor R. S. Woodworth, of Columbia University, extended to us the
courtesy of the Psychological Laboratory during several weeks of the
summer session of 1909, and gave us much assistance in obtaining
interviews with students; we received assistance also from several of
the instructors of Teachers' College, especially Mr. Wm. H. Noyes.

We are indebted to Mr. F.C. Lewis and Mr. W.E. Stark, of the Ethical
Culture School, New York, for permitting us to make the test upon the
pupils of that school.

In the work of compiling the tables we have been assisted by Dr. N.
W. Bartram, Dr. Jennie A. Dean, Mrs. H. M. Kent, and others.

We wish, finally, to express our thanks to Dr. Wm. Austin Macy,
superintendent of this hospital, to whom we are indebted for the
opportunity of undertaking this work.



THE FREQUENCY TABLES.


1. TABLE

accommodation     1
article           3
articles          1

basket            1
bench             9
board            14
book              7
books             5
boy               1
bread             1
breakfast         2
broad             2
brown             1
butter            1

cards             2
celery            1
center            1
chair           267
chairs            7
chemical          1
cloth            57
cockroaches       1
comfort           1
cover            17
cutlery           1

desk             11
dine              2
dining            4
dinner           26
dish              5
dishes           40
dissection        1
dog               1

eat              63
eatables          1
eating           34

ferns             1
fête              1
flat              5
floor             7
food             29
fork              1
form              1
furniture        75

glass             1

hard              9
hat               1
home              2
house             3

ink               1

kitchen           1

lamp              1
large             4
leaf              1
leaves            1
library           1
leg              13
legs             10
linen             2
long              1
low               2

Mabel             1
mahogany          2
mat               1
meal              6
meals             4
meat              2
mess              1

nails             2
napkin            1
number            1

oak               1
object            1
old               1
operating         1
ornament          2

parlor            1
pitcher           1
plate             4
plates            1
plateau           1
polished          1

refreshments      1
rest              3
room              3
round            10

school            1
serviceable       1
set               2
shiny             1
sit               3
sitting           2
slab              1
smooth            1
soup              1
spiritualism      1
spoon             6
spread            2
square            9
stable            1
stand            36
stool             3
straight          1
strong            1
supper            1

tablecloth        1
tea               1
timber            1
top               2
typewriter        1

use               2
useful            3
utensil           1

victuals          2

wagon             1
whist             1
white             1
wire              1
wood             76
wooden            1
work              2
working           1
write             2
writing           6


2. DARK

afraid            6

baby              1
bad               1
barks             1
black            76
blackness         2
blank             1
blind             2
blindness         2
blue              5
board             1
boat              1
bright           15
brightness        4
brown             4

candle            1
cart              1
cat               2
cell              1
cellar            6
close             1
closet            1
cloud             2
clouds            2
cloudy            3
cold              2
color            28
colored           1
colorless         1
coon              1
curly             1

day               1
daylight          1
dead              1
denseness         1
dim               3
dimness           3
dingy             2
dismal            3
dog               1
door              1
dreary            1
dress             4
dungeon           5
dusk              1
dusky             1

evening           4
eye               1
eyes              2

fair              2
fear              6
fearful           1
fearsome          1
fright            2

ghost             1
ghosts            1
gloom             6
gloomy           11
gray              1
green             1
ground            1

hair              5
hall              1
hell              1
hole              1
horse             3
house             2

illumination      1
invisible         2

lamp              1
lantern           1
light           427
lonely            1
lonesome          1
lonesomeness      1

mahogany          1
man               4
mice              1
midnight          1
moon              6
moonlight         1
mysterious        1

nice              1
night           221

oblivion          1
obscure           1

parlor            1
prison            1

red               5
rest              3
room             22

scare             1
shades            1
shadow            2
shadows           1
sky               1
sleep             1
sleeping          1
space             1
starry            1
stars             2
stillness         1
storm             1
stumbling         1
subject           1
sunlight          1

thunder           1
tree              1
twilight          1

unseen            1

walk              1
weather           3
white             9
woods             1



3. MUSIC

accordion         1
air               3
amuse             1
amusement        10
art               7
attention         1
attraction        1

band              6
bassviol          1
beautiful         7
beauty            2
Beethoven         7
bell              1
bird              1
birds             1
book              1
books             2
box               2
brightness        1

captivating       1
cats              1
charm             1
charms            1
charming          2
cheerful          2
cheerfulness      2
Chopin            1
chord             1
chords            1
clarinette        1
classic           1
classical         2
composer          2
company           1
concert           2
conductor         1

dance            17
dances            1
dancing          15
delight           1
delightful        2
discord           3
drama             1

ear               3
ecstasy           1
elevating         1
enchantment       1
enjoyable         1
enjoyed           1
enjoyment        13
entertaining      5
entertainment     3
entrancing        1

feeling           1
fiddle            1
fine              2
flowers           1
flute             1
fun               1

gaiety            2
gay               1
genius            1
girl              2
gladness          1
Goethe            1
good              3
guitar            1

hall              2
happiness         5
happy             2
harmonious        1
harmony          45
hear              1
heaven            2
hurdygurdy        1
hymn              1

idealism          1
instrument       21
instruments       5
instrumental      1

jolly             1
joy              11
joyful            1

lesson            1
light             1
line              1
liveliness        1
lonely            1
loud              1
love              2


man               1
meditation        1
melody           24
Mendelsohn        1
Merry Widow       1
Mozart            1
Mr. B.            1
Mrs. E.           1
musician          3
mute              1

nice              6
nocturne          1
noise            16
noisy             1
note              2
notes            17

opera             5
orchestra         5
organ             6

paper             2
pastime           1
piano           180
pianola           2
pitch             1
play              7
playing           8
pleasant         10
pleasantness      1
pleasing          5
pleasure         31
poem              1
poetry            4
practice          1
pretty            4
pupils            1

quiet             1

rack              1
racket            1
rhyme             1
roll              2
room              1

sadness           2
scale             1
Schubert          2
score             1
sheet             5
sheets            1
sing             12
singer            1
singing          48
soft              1
softness          1
solemn            1
song             68
songs             6
soothing          2
sound            95
sounds            2
stool             2
strain            1
strains           2
string            1
study             2
sweet            47
sweetness         6
symphony          4

talent            2
teacher           6
teaching          1
thought           1
time              2
tone              3
town              1
tune              2

violin           21
voice             2

Wagner            3
wavy              1
window            1
words             1
worship           1

Yankee Doodle     1


4. SICKNESS

affliction        1
age               1
ailing            3
ailment           2
air               1
anxiety           1
appendicitis      3
aunt              1

baby              3
bad              15
bed              54
Bertha            1
better            1
body              1
business          1

calamity          1
care              1
child             2
cold              1
condition         1
consumption       3
contagious        2
convalescence     1
convalescing      2
cure              3

danger            1
death           115
dietary           1
diphtheria        8
disability        1
disabled          2

discomfort        3
disease          20
distress          4
doctor           62

dread             1
dreariness        1

enjoyed           1
ether             1
exhaustion        1

family            1
father            3
fear              1
feeble            4
feel              1
feeling           1
fever             9
fevers            1
fracture          1
fright            1

gloom             1
gravel            1
grief             3
grunting          1

hard              2
hatefulness       1
headache          5
health          142
healthy           4
home              2
horrible          1
hospital          9

ill              48
illness          71
incompetence      1
inconvenience     1
indisposition     1
infirmary         1
insanity          1
invalid           2

K.                1

low               1
lying             1

malady            2
man               1
measles           3
medication        1
medicine         30
melancholy        1
mine              1
misery            3
misfortune        3
mother            3

nervousness       2
neuralgis         1
nurse            15
nursing           2

operation         1
oranges           1

pain             56
painful           1
pale              2
patient           7
patients          1
people            1
person            1
physician         7
pill              1
pills             1
plague            1
pleasantness      1
pneumonia         5
poverty           1

quiet             1
quietness         1

recovery          2
relapsing         1
rheumatism        1
room              1

sad               7
sadness           9
serious           2
severe            4
sigh              1
sore              1
sorrow           24
sorry             2
stomach           1
strength          2
suffer            1
suffering        12
summer            1
sympathy          2

terror            1
together          1
trouble          20
trying            1
typhoid           6

uncomfortable     2
unhappiness       1
unhappy           1
unhealthy         1
unpleasant        5
unpleasantness    2
unwell           11


want              1
weak              1
weakness         11
weariness         2
weary             1
well             40
white             1
worried           1

worriment         1


5. MAN

adult             2
affection         1
age               1
alive             1
animal           12
animals           1
animate           1
appearance        2

baby              1
bad               2
beard             1
beast             2
being            19
biped             3
blond             1
body              3
boy              44
brain             1
bright            1
brightness        1
brother           8
brotherhood       1
brute             1
bum               1
business          6

cane              3
certain           1
Charles           2
child            10
children          2
Christian         1
clergyman         1
clothes           7
clothing          2
coat              3
comfort           1
companion         1
company           1
coon              1
crank             1
creature          8
cross             1

devil             1
doctor            2
dress             1

educator          1
existence         1

fakir             1
false             1
family            1
father           15
female            3
flesh             2
form              2
fraud             1
Fred              1
friend            2

gentle            1
gentleman         7
girl              6
glacier           1
good             10
greatness         1
grown             1
growth            1

hair              1
hat               7
help              2
home              1
homely            1
horrible          1
horse             4
house             1
human            22
humanity          1
husband           4

individual        1
insane            1
institution       1
intellectual      1
intelligent       1

janitor           1
Joe               1

labor             1
laborer           1
lady              7
large            11
life              4
light             1
limb              1
living            2
lord              1
love              1

machine           1
maiden            1
male             99
mammal            1
manhood           1
mankind           5
manliness         1
manly             2
marriage          1
married           1
masculine         6
mason             1
mind              1
might             1
minister          1
minor             1
misery            1
money             1
monkey            1
Mr. D.            1
Mr. H.            1
Mr. N.            1
Mr. S.            3
muscular          1

N.                1
nature            1
Ned               1
nice              1
noble             3
nuisance          1

out               1

papa              1
passion           1
people            2
person           30
pleasure          1
policeman         2
politician        1
power             5
professor         1
prosperity        1
provider          1

Roosevelt         1
ruler             1

self              1
sex               4
shirt             1
shoes             1
short             1
smoking           1
stern             1
stout             1
street            1
strength         32
strong            8
sweetheart        1

Taft              1
tall             12
thought           1
trousers          6
true              1

unfeminine        1
use               1

V.                1
voter             1

walk              1
wedding           1
whiskers          1
wife              5
wise              1
woman           394
work             17
works             1
worker            1
working           3

young             2


6. DEEP


abyss             3
altitude          1
around            1

below             3
beneath           1
black             1
blue              3
bottom            1
bottomless        1
bowl              1
breath            1
broad             1
brooding          1
brook             1

cave              2
Cayuga            1
chair             1
chasm             2
cellar            1
classic           1
clear             1
cliff             1

danger            3
dangerous         5
dark             28
darkness          4
dense             1
depth            31
depths            1
diameter          1
dig               1
distance          8
ditch             8
doleful           1
down             27
dread             1

earth             1
extension         1

fall              2
falling           3
far               3
fathomless        5
fear              1
full              1

gloomy            1
good              1
gorge             1
great             1
ground            1

heavy             1
height            5
high             37
hole             32
hollow           13

large             8
length            8
level             2
light             4
long             18
low              51

measure           2
mighty            1
mind              1
mine              4

narrow            3

ocean            93
organ             1

philosophy        1
pit               1
pond              1
pool              1
precipice         1
profound          4

ravine            1
reaching          1
river            13
rocks             1

safety            1
scare             1
sea              90
sewer             1
shade             1

shady             1
shallow         180
sharp             1
ship              1
short             1
sincere           1
sink              2
sleep             1
smooth            1
sorrow            1
sound             2
space             6
spacious          2
steep             7
story             1
strong            1
study             1
sunken            1
surface           1
swimming          1

thick             1
thickness         1
thin              1
thinking          2
thought          14
thoughts          2
tranquil          1
trench            1

under             1

valley            1
vast              2

wading            1
water           134
well             44
wet               1
wide             12
width             2


7. SOFT

apple             1

baby              7
ball              2
beautiful         1
bed              12
boiled            1
brain             1
bread             4
breeze            1
butter           12

cake              1
candy             1
care              1
carpet            1
cat               1
cement            1
clay              1
clean             1
cloth             3
clothes           1
coal              2
cold              1
color             2
comfort           2
comfortable       5
comply            1
consistency       1
cotton           28
crabs             1
cream             2
creeping          1
cushion          25


dark              1
dough             1
down              6
dress             1
drink             1

earth             7
ease              1
easy             34
egg               2
eggs              2
eyes              1

feather           2
feathers         24
feathery          1
feel              1
feeling           8
felt              1
fine              5
firm              1
flabby            3
fleece            1
flesh             1
flexible          7
floor             1
fluffy            1
food              2
foolish           1
form              1
fruit             3
fun               1
fur               4

gentle            3
girl              1
glove             1
good              3
grasp             1
grass             1
ground            3
gum               1

hair              3
hand              3
hands             1
hard            365
harsh             1
hazy              1
head              1

idiot             1

jelly             1

kitten            2

large             1
light             8
lightly           1
liquid            2
loose             2
loud              5
low               5

maple             1
marshes           1
medium            1
mellow           11
membrane          1
mild              2
moist             1
moss              2
mud              15
mush             10
mushing           1
mushy            12
music             4

nice              4


palatable         1
peach             2
pear              2
pillow           53
pillows           2
pliable           8
plush             2
pudding           4
putty             4

quality           1
quiet             2

rubber            3


sand              1
satisfactory      1
seat              1
silk             10
skin              1
slow              2
slushy            1
smooth           27
snap              3
snow              7
soap              6
soup              1
sponge           22
sponges           1
spongy            8
squash            1
sticky            1
strong            1
substance         1
sweet             8
sweetness         1

tender            8
texture           1
timid             1
tomatoes          1
touch             4

velvet           15
voice             2

wadding           1
warm              1
water             8
watery            1
wax               1
wet               3
white             3
wool              8
woolen            1

yielding          5


8. EATING

abstain           1
abstinence        1
action            2
appetite         28
apple             4
apples            6
assimilation      1

biting            1
bread            46
breakfast         7
butter            1

cake              4
candy             3
Chacona's         1
chew              1
chewing          27
chicken           3
coffee            1
Commons           1
consuming         4
cooking           3
cream             2

devour            1
devouring         2
diet              2
diets             1
digest            1
digesting         7
digestion        10
dine              2
dining            1
dinner           31
drink             6
drinking        166
dyspepsia         1

enjoyable         1
enjoying          1
enjoyment         2
enough            1
etiquette         1

fast              3
fasting           5
fattening         1
feasting          2
feed              1
feeding           5
filling           2
finishing         1
fish              3
flavor            1
flesh             1
food            170
fork              2
forks             1
fruit             8
full              4

gluttonish        1
good             23
gormandizer       1
gratifying        1

habit             3
health            9
healthful         1
heartily          1
hearty            1
hot               2
house             1
hunger           19
hungry           44

ice-cream         2
indigestion       4


knives            1

lemons            1
life              2
live              4
living            5
lobster           1
lobsters          1
lunch             8

masticate         1
masticating      11
mastication       5
matter            1
meal              4
meals            10
meat             11
meeting           1
mild              1
milk              1
more              1
motion            1
mouth             2
movement          1
much              1
myself            1

necessary         4
necessity         7
nice              3
nourish           1
nourishing        2
nourishment      11

olives            1
oranges           1

palatable         2
people            3
pie               3
pleasant          7
pleasantness      1
pleasure         10
plenty            1
poor              1
potato            1
potatoes          2
provisions        1
pudding           1

quick             1
quickly           1

refreshing        2
refreshment       1
Reisenweber       1
relief            1
relish            2
resting           2
room              1

sandwich          1
satisfaction     12
satisfied         4
satisfy           1
satisfying        5
sick              1
sit               1
sitting           1
sleep             1
sleeping         17
slow              2
slowly            1
soup              2
starving          4
steak             2

stomach           2
strawberries      1
strength          2
substance         1
sufficient        2
sugar             1
surfeiting        1
sustaining        1
sustenance        2
swallow           6
swallowing        5

table            21
talking           1
taste             7
tasting           2
teeth             3
thinking          1
throat            1
tongue            1

use               1
utensils          1

vegetable         2
vegetables        8
victuals          4

want              2
water             1
watermelon        1
well              2
work              1


9. MOUNTAIN

abrasion          1
Adirondacks       4
air               2
Alleghany         3
Alps              6
altitude          2
attractive        1
automobile        1

Bald              1
beautiful         1
beauty            2
big               2
Blanc             1
Bluff             1
Breckenridge      1

camping           1
Catskills         8
cliff             2
cliffs            1
Clifton           1
climb             9
climbing         27
close             1
clouds            3
cone              1
country           5
crevice           1

descend           1
descending        2
desert            1
dirt              1
distance          1
ditch             1

earth             3
elevation         9

fear              1
field             1
Flashman          1
foliage           1
fountain          1


Galeton           1
geography         1
grand             1
grandeur          3
granite           1
grass             1
great             1
green             4
ground            1

heath             1
height           73
heights           2
high            246
highlands         1
highness          2
hill            184
hills            82
hilltop           2
hilltops          1
hilly             2
Himalaya          1
hollow            5
Holyoke           1
home              1

horse             1
Hudson            1
huge              2

impressive        1
incline           1
island            1

Kipling           1
knoll             1

lake              8
land              6
landscape         1
large             4
level             1
lofty             1
low               2
lowland           1

Monodonack        1
mound             1
Mount Ivy         1
Mount Kearsarge   1
Mount McKinley    1
Mount Pleasant    1
Mount Shasta      1
Mount Wilson      1

object            2
Owl's Head        1

peak             16
peaks             1
pictures          1
Pike's Peak       1
pines             1
plain            11
plateaus          1
pleasure          3

pointed           1
railway           1
range             3
ranges            1
river             8

rock             10
Rockies           6
rocks            18
rocky             5
rough             1

scene             1
scenery           3
sea               1
seas              1
seashore          1

shadows           1
shooting          1
size              1
sky               2
slope             1
snow             10
steep            12
steepness         1
stone             2
stones            1
stream            2
summit            4
Switzerland       2

tall              1
Terrace           1
top               5
tree              2
trees            17

up                1

vale              2
valley           90
valleys           5
Vermont           1
view              2
volcano           2

Washington        1
White             5
wood              1
woods             3


10. HOUSE

abode            15
alley             1
apartment         3

background        1
barn             74
Bay Ridge         1
beautiful         2
Belknap           1
big               4
blinds            1
boards            3
boat              2
box               1
brick            23
bricks            5
brown             2
build             2
building         78
bungalow          2

cabin             8
camp              1
carpenter         1
carpet            1
castle            4
cattle            1
cellar            1
chair             2
chamber           1
chicken           1
chimney           5
church            1
city              2
clean             2
closed            1
college           1
comfort           9
comforts          1
comfortable       3
contractor        1
corridor          1
cottage          42
cover             3
covering          1

dark              1
den               1
dog               2
domestic          1
domicile          1
door             16
doors             1
dwell             3
dwelling         68

enclosure         1
erection          1

family            4
fancy             1
farm              2
farmer            1
fence             1
field             1
fire              1
floor             1
form              1
foundation        1
frame             5
friends           1
furnace           1
furnishing        1
furniture        11

garden           10
grandmother       1
great             1
green             2

ground            3
grounds           1

habitable         1
habitation        5

happiness         1
height            2
high              3
hill              3
home            103
homeless          1
hospital          4
hot               1
hotel             4
hovel             1
hut               2

inhabitant        1
inhabited         1
inmates           1
into              1

joy               1

land             10
lake              1

large            24
lawn              3
lemon             1
Leonia            1
life              2
live             33
living           19
lot              18
lots              1
lumber            3

man               2
mansion          14
material          1
mine              1
mortgage          1
Mountain House    1
mouse             2

new               1

object            1
old               1
ours              1

palace            1
painting          1
Pasadena          1
people           11
piazza            2
picture           1
place             6
pleasant          1
pretty            3
property          1
protection        3

red               4
refuge            1
residence        19
resident          2
restful           1
road              1
roof             12
room              9
rooms             8

Sage              1
school            2
sea               1
shanty            1
shed              5
shelter          22
sky               2
small             2
spacious          1
square            4
stable            3
star              1
steps             1
stone             7
stoop             1
store             2
street            7
structure         8

tabernacle        1
table             1
tall              1
telescope         1
tenant            1
tenement          2
tent              3
timber            1
top               5
town              1
tree              2
trees             1
tumbler           1

villa             2
village           1

walls             1
warm              3
wealth            1
well              1
white             9
Whittier          1
wide              1
willow            1
window            9
windows           5
wood             31
wooden            1
workman           1
worship           1

yard             10


11. BLACK

agreeable         1

blue              8
board             3
book              2
bright            2
buggy             1


cat               8
chair             1
charcoal          1
cloth            17
clothes           4
cloud             1
clouds            1
cloudy            2
coal              3
coat              3
color           129
colored           1
colorless         3
crepe             2
curtain           1

dark            172
darkness         36
death             4
dense             1
desolate          1
dirty             2
disagreeable      1
disklike          1
dog               4
domino            1
dress            29
dye               2

earth             1
ebony             1

face              1
fear              2
figure            1
flecked           1
floor             1
funeral           1

gloomy            2
gown              1
gray              2
green             7

hair              2
hat               3
heavy             1
hog               1
horror            1
horse             5

impenetrable      1
ink              14

lack              1
light            12

mammy             1
man               2
Mrs. B.           1
mournful          2
mourning         17
mud               1

negro             7
negroes           1
nigger            6
night            51
nothing           1


obscure           1
orange            1

paint             4
paper             1
pen               1
pink              2
pipe              1
pit               1

radiator          1
red               4
ribbon            1
robe              1


sad               1
sadness           2
sack              1
shady             1
sheep             2
shoe              4
shoes             1
sign              1
skirt             2
sky               1
somber            2
soot              1
sorrow            4
space             1
spectrum          1
stocking          1
stockings         1
suit              1

table             1
tar               1
terror            1
tie               1

umbrella          1

velvet            1


wall              2
water             1
white           339

wonder            1
wood              1

yellow            2


12. MUTTON

animal            9
animals           1
appetite          1
Australia         1

baa               1
beef             97
bony              1
breakfast         1
broth            15
brown             1
butcher           2

calf              2
cattle            1
cheap             3
chop             34
chops            33
cow               2

delicious         1
dinner            6
disagreeable      2

dish              1
dislike           2
disliked          1

eat              14
eatable           7
eating           10

fat               7
field             2
flesh            10
flock             1
food             30
fork              1
fowl              1

goat              1
good              9
grass             1
grease            2
greasy            1

ham               2
hate              1
head              2
horrid            1

indigestion       1

knife             1

lamb            121
lambs             2
leg               5

Mary              1
meat            257
mouse             1
muttonhead        1

nice              2

old               1

pastures          1
peas              1
pig               2
pork              3

rare              1
roast             4

sauce             1
sheep           204
smell             1
soft              1
soup              2
stale             1
steak             3
stew              2
strong            2

table             4
tallow            6
tender            3
thinking          1
tough             6

uncle             1

veal             30
vegetables        1
vegetarian        1

wool              4


13. COMFORT

agony             1
annoyance         1

bad               1
bed              42
blanket           4
book              1
books             1

canoe             1
care              4
chair            31
cheer             1
children          1
cloth             1
comfortable       4
comforter         1
consolation       2
console           1
consoling         1
content           2
contentment       4
convenience       2
cozy              1
couch             9
cover             1
covering          1
cushion           4
cushions          1

davenport         1
death             1
delightful        1
desirable         2
discomfort       24
disease           1
displeasure       1
distress          4
driving           1

ease            165
easiness         11
easy             61
eating            1
enjoying          1
enjoyment         6

feather           1
feeling           1
fireplace         2
fireside          2
friends           1

God               1
good              5
goodness          1
great             1
grief             1

hammock           7
happiness        50
happy            17
hard              2
hardship          7
healing           1
health           15
help              3
home             63
house             4
household         1

I                 1
idleness          1
ill               1

joy               9
justice           1

kindness          1

lamp              1
laziness          2
lazy              1
leisure           6
less              1
life              1
like              1
living            2
loneliness        1
lounge            6
luxurious         1
luxury           23

man               1
mansion           1
miserable         1
misery            9
money             9
mother            3

neatness          1
nice              4
none              1
nurse             2

pain              4
palace            2
patient           1
peace            12
people            1
pillow            2
pipe              1
playing           1
pleasant          9
please            1
pleasure         77
plentiness        1
plenty            1
Polly             1
post              1

quiet             6
quietness         1
quilt             7

rain              1
relief            1

rest             53
restful           1
restfulness       1
resting           5
rich              1
rocker            8

safety            1
salary            1
satisfaction      4
satisfied         8
security          1
settled           1
sick              1
sickness          3
sit               1
sitting           4
sleep            10
slippers          1
slumber           1
smoke             1
smoking           1
sofa              5
soft              2
solace            1
solid            11
solitude          8
soothing          2
sorrow            5
speak             1
spirit            1
spread            1
suffering         1
sweet             1
swing             1

table             2
taken             1
tea               1
thankfulness      1
tired             1
trials            1

trouble           1

uncomfort         1
uncomfortable    10
uneasiness        3
uneasy            3
unrest            1
unwell            1

warm              6
warmth            4
wealth            6
well              8
well-being        1
wine              1
wish              1
woman             1
wool              1
work              1

ye                1


14. HAND

anatomy           2
arm              63
arms              2

ball              1
beautiful         3
black             3
bleeding          1
body             48
bone              1
bones             1
busy              1

cards             2
clean             1
clock             1
convenience       1
cradle            1
cunning           1

dexterity         1
diligence         1
dissecting        1
do                1
doing             2
dog               1

ear               1
elbow             1
extremity         6

face              7
fat               1
feel             11
feeling           5
feet             35
fellowship        2
finger           39
fingers          83
fist              1
flesh            19
foot            204
form              1
formation         1
friend            1
friendship        1
fruit             1

give              1
glove            20
gloves            5
good              1
grasp             8
greeting          1
grip              8

handle            1
handy             3
hard              1
head              1
heart             2
help              6
helper            2
helping           1
hold              8
holding           1
human             2

instrument        2

jewel             1

kindness          1
knife             1
knitting          1

labor             1
large             1
leg               4
legs              1
lemon             1
life              2
limb             48
limbs             1
long              1
love              1

machine           2
maid              1
man               3
manipulation      1
member           14
mind              1
mine              1
mouth             4
move              1
muscle            4

nail              2
nails             1
name              1
narrow            3
necessity         2
nice              1
nimble            1
nose              1

object            1
organ             4

palm              5
part              1
paw               2
pencil            1
perfect           1
person           10
piano             1
pen               1
power             8
pretty            8
purity            1

reach             1
rest              1
right            11
ring             28

rings             2

satisfaction      1
servant           1
sew               2
sewing            2
shake             9
shape             1
shapely           1
shop              1
shoulder          1
akin              4
slim              1
small             8
soap              1
soft              8
something         1
sore              1
strength          6
strong            3
support           1
system            1

table             1
thread            1
touch             9
two               2

use              12
useful           24
usefulness        4

watch             1
woman             1
work             49
white            15
wrist             1
write             3
writing          11

you               1


15. SHORT

abbreviated       2
age               1
arm               2

baby              1
beach             1
beam              1
board             1
boy               3
brevity           1
brick             1
brief             7
broad             1
build             1

C.                1
cake              1
chair             1
change            1
child             4
children          1
clock             1
cloth             1
comfort           1
compact           1
cut               1
cylinder          1

dainty            1
day               4
deficient         2
dimension         1
diminiature       1
diminutive        2
disagreeable      1
distance         10
dot               1
down              1
drawn             1
dress             3
dumpy             2
dwarf            11
dwarfs            1

easy              2
elongated         1
extension         1

fat               4
finger            1
flowerpot         1
foot              2
friend            2

girl             11
good              1
grandmother       1
grass             5

hair              2
happiness         1
height           13
high              4
hour              1
hours             3

inch              5

journey           2

Karl              1

lacking           1
lady              4
lake              1
large             2
leg               2
length           18
lesson            1
lessons           1
life              5
little           15
line              1
lived             1
long            279
low              11
lowly             1

man              20
measure           3
measurements      1
medium            2
midget            1
millimeter        1
minus             1
Miss K.           1
money             1
mother            1
myself            6

name              1
narrow            1
near              1
needle            1
not               1

out               1

pencil            6
people            3
person           15
petticoat         1
pin               1
pity              1
plant             1
plants            1
pony              1
post              2
pygmy             2

quick             8
quickly           1

road              1
round             1

session           1
shallow           1
sister            1
size              5
skirt             1
sleek             1
slight            1
slightly          1
small           136
space             1
speech            2
square            1
staccato          1
stature           2
stem              2
stick             8
stop              2
story             1
stout            24
strawberries      1
street            2
string            1
strong            1
stubborn          1
stubby            9
stumpy            4
stunned           1
stunted           1
sufficient        1
sum               1
sweet             1

tall            168
thick             6
thin              1
time              8
tiny              1
Tom Thumb         1
tree              1

unpleasant        1
useless           1

vacation          1

waisted           1
walk              3
want              1
wanting           2
water             1
well              1
wide              1
woman             6
wood              1
worm              1

you               1


16. FRUIT

acid              2
appetite          2
apple           157
apples          102
article           1

bake              1
banana           11
bananas           8
berries           7
berry             1
blackberries      1
bread             2

cake              2
can               1
candies           1
candy             3
cherries          2
cherry            2
country           1
currants          1

dainty            1
delicacy          2
delicious         9
desire            1
digest            1
digestion         1

easy              1
eat              62
eatable          33
eatables         15
eating           35
edible            1
eggs              1
enjoyment         2

figs              1
fish              1
flesh             1
flower            3
flowers           3
fond              1
food             22
fresh             1

garden            2
good             24
grain             2
grape             4
grapes           14
grapefruit        1
green             1
groves            1
grow              1
grows             1
growth            2

health            3
healthy           3
home              1

Italians          1
invigorating      1

jam               1
juice             6
juicy             5

knife             1

lemon             2
liked             1
love              1
luscious          5
luxury            2

meat              4
medicine          1
melon             1
milk              1

nourishing        1
nourishment       2
nice              5
nutritious        2
nuts              2

orange           25
oranges          26
orchard           6
outcome           1

palatable         2
peach            17
peaches          32
pears            11
picking           1
pie               1
pineapple         2
plant             1
plants            1
pleasant          2
pleasure          1
plenty            2
plum              2
produce           2
prune             1

raspberries       1
raspberry         1
red               1
result            1
ripe              9
ripeness          1

salad             1
seed              5
sickness          1
sour              4
south             1
spring            1
stalk             1
stand             1
stems             1
store             1
strawberries      2
strawberry        1
summer            2
swallow           1
sweet            24
sweets            1

table             3
taste             5
tree             25
trees            27

vegetable        75
vegetables       28

watermelon        1
wine              1


17. BUTTERFLY

air               1
airiness          1
airy              2
animal           24
animals           2
ant               2

beast             1
beautiful        24
beauty           20
bee              31
bees              4
beetle            5
bird             64
birds            10
black             2
blossom           1
blue              1
bread             2
bright            1
brilliant         2
brown             1
bush              1
butter            3
buttercup         6
bug              11
bugs              1
bumblebee         1

cabbage           1
caterpillar      37
caterpillars      1
chase             1
chrysalis         3
cocoon            6
cocoons           1
collection        4
color            12
colors            8
colored           3
country           2
cricket           1

daisy             1
dish              1
dove              1
dress             1
dust              1

eagle             1
ease              1
ephemeral         1

fairy             1
field             2
fields            1
firefly           1
flies             6
flight            2
flippant          1
flittering        1
flitting          1
flits             1
flower           13
flowers          12
flutter           2
fluttering        1
fly              44
flying           20

gaudy             1
gauze             1
gay               2
girl              2
gnat              2
golden            3
good              1
grace             2
graceful          1
grass             1
grasshopper       5
grasshoppers      2
grub              5

handsome          1
happy             1
high              1
horse             1
human             1

idler             1
insect          261
insects           2

Japanese          1

kite              1

lady              1
lepidoptera       8
light             5
lightness         2
lilies            1
little            1

meadows           1
metamorphosis     1
miller            4
monarch           1
mosquito          8
motion            1
moth             30
moths             1
mountains         1
mourning cloak    1

nature            2
net               6
nets              1
nice              2

orange            1
outdoors          1

pancake           1
pig               1
pigeon            2
plumage           1
powder            1
pretty           30

red               1

small             2
snakes            1
snare             1
soul              1
sparrow           1
speckled          1
spider            9
spotted           2
spring            5
summer           17
sun               1
sunshine          6
swallow           1
sweet             1
swift             1

temporary         1
tree              1
two               1

useless           1

vanity            2
variegated        1

wasp             11
white             2
wind              1
wing             11
wings            81
word              1
worm             12
worms             2

yellow           37


18. SMOOTH

apple             2

ball              1
basin             1
bed               2
board             9
butter            1

calm              4
carpet            1
character         1
cheek             1
chip              1
circus            1
clean             2
clear             8
cloth             3
clothes           1
coarse            2
coat              1
country           1
course            1
cream             2
cube              1

deceitful         1
deep              1
desk              1
done              1
dry               1

ease              2
easy             12
even             30
evenness          1

face              8
fair              1
feeling           1
fine              8
finished          2
flat             14
flexible          2
floor            15
folded            1
fur               2

glass            56
glassy            4
glazed            1
glide             3
gliding           1
glossy           11
good              2
goods             1
grand             1
grass             8
grease            1
ground            4

hair              3
hand              2
hard             41
harmonious        1
harsh             4

ice              14
iron             13
ironing           1
ivory             1

kind              1

lake              1
lawn              2
lens              1
level            52
lightly           1
lovely            1

machinery         1
mahogany          1
marble           10
mercury           1
mild              1
mirror            1
molasses          1

narrow            1
nice              4
nicely            1

oyster            1

paint             1
paper             9
paste             2
pat               1
path              1
pebble            1
person            1
piano             1
placid            1
plain            17
plane            23
planed            1
pleasant          5
pleasing          1
plum              1
polished          5
pressed           1

quality           1
queer             1

river             1
river             2
road              4
roads             1
roof              2
rough           277
round             2
rubber            1
rugged            1
rule              1
running           1

sailing           1
sandpaper         1
satin             2
sea               1
shape             1
sharp             1
shave             1
shiny             4
silk              4
silken            1
skin              5
sleek             2
slick             3
slippery          4
snail             2
snake             1
soft             70
softness          1
sphere            1
stone             1
straight          2
street            1
stroke            1
surface          25

table            29
thin              1
thought           1
tidy              1
tomato            1
tongue            1
touch             4
tranquil          1

uneven            2

velvet           20
velvety           1
very              1

wall              5
walls             1
water            10
wave              1
window            1

wood              8
work              1
worm              1
wrinkled          1
wrinkles          1


19. COMMAND

ability           1
act               1
acting            1
anger             1
answer            1
anything          1
appeal            1
appearance        1
army             16
arrogance         1
ask               2
asking            2
athletics         1
attention         3
authority        14

baseball          1
Bible             1
bid               1
boss              6
boy               1

captain           7
charge            2
chief             2
church            1
combine           1
combined          1
come              5
commander         5
commandment       2
company           2
compel            1
control           8
cross             1

dare              1
demand           18
demanding         1
desire            2
determined        2
dictate           3
dictatorial       1
dignity           2
direct            2
disability        1
discipline        2
dislike           1
do               27
doing             3
domineer          2
domineering       2
done              2
don't             2
door              1
drill             2
driver            1
duty              5

earnestness       1
easy              1
eat               1
effort            1
employ            1
employees         1
enforce           1
entreat           1
entreaty          7
exclamation       1
exertion          1
experience        1

father            1
firm              1
forbid            1
force             7
forced            1
foreman           1

gain              1
general          43
gentleness        1
gently            1
Germany           1
give              1
go               25
God               1
God's             1
good              2
govern            1
grand             1

halt              4
harsh             4
harshly           1
haughty           1
head              1
him               1
holy              1
honorable         1
horse             1

I                 1
immediately       1
imperative        3
imperious         4
independent       1
insist            1
instant           1
institution       1
instruct          2
instruction       1
intelligence      1

judge             1

knowing           1

labor             1
language          1
law               2
laziness          1
lead              2
leader            1
lieutenant        1
listen            2
loud              2
love              1

madam             1
man               9
master            2
masterful         1
military          3
mind              2
mother            1
move              1
must              1

noble             1
nuisance          1

obedience        12
obedient          2
obey            230
obeyed            1
officer          30
only              1
order           171
ordering          2
orders            9

parents           1
peace             1
people            2
peremptory        2
perfect           1
person            1
plead             1
policeman         1
power            10
powerful          2
praise            1
proper            1

question          1
quick             1

refuse            2
regiment          1
reply             1
reprimand         2
request          11
respect           5
respond           1
retreat           1
right             3
rule              2
ruling            1
running           1

say               1
saying            1
school            2
severe            1
shalt             1
ship              1
soldier          16
soldiers          6
something         1
speak             3
spoken            1
stamina           1
statement         1
stern             7
strength          3
strict            1
strong            3
stubborn          1
superintend       1
superior          1
supervisor        1
surly             1
surrender         1

talk              2
teach             1
teacher          14
teachers          1
teaching          1
tell             15
telling           1
temper            3
temperament       1
thee              1
them              1
think             2
thinking          1
thoughtfulness    1
threat            1
told              2

uncomfortable     1
upright           1

voice             6
vow               1

wagon             1
wife              1
will              3
willing           1
words             2
work              2
wrong             1

you               3


20. CHAIR

arm               4
article           4

back              1
beauty            1
bed               1
bench            13
book              1
boy               1
broken            2
brown             4
bureau            1

cane              3
caning            1
careful           1
carpet            1
cart              1
color             1
comfort          21
comfortable       8
convenience       3
couch             5
crooked           1
cushion          12
cushions          1

desk              9

ease              7
easy              6

fatigue           1
floor            10
feet              1
foot              1
footstool         1
form              1
furniture        83

Governor Winthrop 1

hair              1
hard              5
hickory           2
high              4
home              2
house             3

idleness          1
implement         1

joiner            1

large             3
leg               7
legs             11
lounge            3
low               3
lunch             1

mahogany          3
massive           1
mission           1
Morris            5
myself            1

necessity         2

oak               2
object            1
occupy            1
office            1

people            1
person            3
place             1
placed            1
plant             1
platform          1
pleasant          1
pleasure          1
posture           1

reading           1
rest             45
resting           3
rocker           17
rocking          15
room              9
rounds            2
rubber            1
rung              3

seat            127
seated            5
seating           2
settee            3
sit             107
sitting          56
size              1
sofa              6
soft              5
spooning          1
stand             1
stool            38
stoop             1
study             1
support           1

table           191
tables            1
talk              1
teacher           1
timber            1
tool              1

upholstered       1
upholstery        1
use               2
useful            3

white             1
wood             49
wooden            6


21. SWEET

agreeable         5
appetizing        1
apple            11
apples            3

beautiful         3
bitter           50
black             1
breath            1

candies           1
candy            82
cherries          1
child             1
chocolate         3
chocolates        1
clean             2
confectionery     1
cream             1
cunning           1

delicious         7
dessert           1
dinner            1
dog               1
dreams            1

E.                1
eat               2
elegant           1
eyes              1

face              1
flavor            2
flower            2
flowers           3
food              1
fresh             1
fruit             9

gentle            1
girl              6
good             26

harsh             2
honey            12
hunger            1
Huyler's          1

insipidity        1

kiss              2

limited           1
lovely            1
loving            1
low               2

Mary              1
mellow            1
melody            1
milk              2
molasses          1
mouth             1
music             8
musty             1

name              1
nausea            1
nice             33

orange            1
oranges           2

palatable         9
peach             3
peaches           1
perfume           3
pie               2
plausible         1
pleasant         31
pleasing          4
pleasurable       1
pleasure          1
plum              1
preserves         1

quality           1

saccharine        1
salt              3
salty             1
sharp             1
sickish           1
sixteen           2
soft              6
soothing          1
sour            301
stuff             1
sugar           224
syrup             2

taste            57
tasteful          4
tasting           2
tasty            11
tea               1
toothsome         2

ugly              1
unpleasant        1

very              1
voice             1

wholesome         1


22. WHISTLE

act               1
action            1
air               7
alarm             3
annoyance         3
attention         2
automobile        1

bad               1
bell              2
bird             15
birds             3
blast             1
blew              5
blow             95
blowing           6
blows             2
boat              2
boy              56
boys              5
breath            1
bright            1
brother           1
buzzing           1

call             26
calling           2
cars              2
cent              1
chain             8
children          1
clean             1
clear             1
come              1
conductor         1
crow              1
cry               2
cuckoo            1

dance             3
dear              1
disagreeable      1
distant           1
dog               7
drink             1
dumb              1

ear               1
echo              3
effort            1
engine           15

factory           2
fife              3
fingers           1
fire              3
flute             5
fly               1
Franklin          2
fun               2
funny             1

Galton            1
girl              1

habit             1
happiness         3
harmony           1
harsh             1
holler            5
hollow            1
horn              4
humming           1

instrument        6

joy               2

lad               1
laugh             3
letter-carrier    1
lips              5
locomotive        5
long              3
loud             27
low               1

man               1
mash              1
melodious         1
metal             1
mill              2
mine              1
mocking           1
mouth            27
music            44

nice              3
nightingale       1
noise           173
noisy             3
note              1
notes             1

person            1
piercing          1
pipe              7
pleasure          2
police            1
policeman         6
postman           1
postman's         1
pretty            1
pucker            4

quiet             1


racket            2
report            1
running           1

scream            1
screech           1
sharp             5
shout             4
shrieking         1
shrill           26
shrillness        1
signal            3
sang              1
sing             75
singing           4
soft              1
softly            1
song             12
songs             1
sorority          1
sound           108
sounds            1
steam             3
steamboat         1
stick             1

talk              4
telephone         1
throat            1
tin               7
tool              1
top               1
toy               4
train             6
tree              1
trumpet           2
tune             18

umpire            1
unpleasant        1

vibration         1
voice             3

warble            1
warning           1
whisper           1
whispering        1
willow            8
wind             10
wood              1
wooden            1
work              1

yell              1


23. WOMAN

adult             2
affinity          1
aged              1
angel             2
appearance        1
appreciating      1
artificial        1

baby              1
Barnard           1
beautiful        17
beauty            7
being             9
Bible             1
biped             1
body              3
bonnet            1
boy               3
bright            1

capability        1
cat               1
character         1
child            45
children          2
clean             2
clever            1
clothes           6
clothing          1
comfort           2
companion         1
creature          4
cross             1

dear              1
deceit            1
delicate          1
delightful        1
develop           1
dignity           1
dinner            1
domestic          1
dress            28
dresses           4
dressmaker        1

dust              1

Edna              1
endurance         1
Eve               2
eyes              1

fair              9
fashion           3
female          134
feminine         10
flesh             2
figure            1
fine              2
freedom           1
friend            3

genteel           1
gentle            5
gentleness        1
girl             59
girls             3
goddess           1
good              4
goodness          1
gown              1
grace             3
graceful          2
grand             2
grandmother       1
great             2

hair              9
handsome          4
hat               5
hats              1
helper            1
helpmate          3
her               1
home              3
honor             1
house             2
housekeeper       1
housewife         1
human            11
humanity          2

inexplicable      1
individual        1
intellect         1
interesting       1

kind              5
kindness          1

labor             2
lady             41

large             4
leader            1
liar              1
living            1
lovable           1
love              5
loveliness        1
lovely            3
loving            1

Mabel             1
maid              1
majesty           1
man             292
mankind           2
marriage          2
married           2
mate              2
modesty           1
mother           30
Mrs. S.           1
myself            1

nature            1
necessity         1
nice              3
noble             1
nurse             1

old               1

palmist           1
parasol           1
people            1
perfection        1
person           17
petticoats        1
pleasure          3
pretty           10
purity            1

rib               1


sex               5
short             5
sister            4

skirt             3
skirts            3
slender           2
small             1
softness          1
spiritual         1
stout             2
style             2
suffrage          1
sweet             2
sweetness         2
sweetheart        1

talk              1
tall              7
teacher           1
temporary         1
truth             1

uneasy            1
use               1

virtue            2

waist             1
walks             1
weak              1
weakness          2
wife             15
will              1
womanhood         1
work              2

you               5
young             4


24. COLD

activity          1
agreeable         2
air               4
arctic            1
atmosphere        4
autumn            1

bad               2
bitter            4
bracing           1
breezy            1
brisk             1
bum               1

chill             9
chilly           30

clothes           2
clothing          1
coal              1
coat              5
comfort           2
comfortable       1
comfortless       1
cool              5
cough             5
cure              2

damp              2
dark              4
darkness          1
day               5
death             1
degree            1
disagreeable      6
discomfort        8
dreary            3

feel              1
feeling          10
feet              1
Finland           1
fire              6
fold              1
freeze            7
freezing         23
frigid            2
frost             9
frozen            4
fuel              1
furs              2

grippe            1
gloomy            1

ham               1
hands             1
hard              2
head              2
hearted           1
heat             37
hot             151

ice             114
ice-cream         1
irritating        1

January           1

latitude          1
lemonade          1
light             2

man               2
medicine          1
misery            1
mushroom          1

nature            1
naughty           1
near              1
never             1
night             1
numb              1
numbness          1

overcoat          1


pain              1
Peary             1
penetrating       2
pleasant          1
pressure          1

quiet             1

raw               1
refrigerator      1
rhinitis          1
room              1
running           1
rough             1

sensation         1
severe            5
sharp             3
shiver            6
shivering         2
shivers           1
shivery           1
shrivel           1
shudder           1
sick              4
sickness          6
skating           1
sleighing         1
slow              1
sneezing          1
snow             45
snuffles          1
stone             1
storm             1
stove             3

temperate         1
temperature       8
thermometer       1
touch             1

uncomfortable    10
unpleasant        4

warm            166
warmth            6
water             7
weather          49
well              1
white             1
wind              5
windy             1
winter          120
wraps             1

zero              2


25. SLOW

action            1
age               1
anger             1
animal            2
ant               1
anxiety           1
association       1
automobile        1
awful             1

baby              2
backward          3
backwards         1
bad               1
bear              1
beggar            1
behind            1
better            1
Bill              1
boat              3
boring            1
boy               2
breakdown         1

camel             1
canal boat        1
car               6

cars              2
careful           1
carpenter         1
cart              1
catch             1
caterpillar       2
caution           1
child             1
climb             1
clock             5
coach             3
conversation      1
cow               1
crawl             1
creep             1
creeping          2

dead              1
decrease          1
delay             2
deliberate        1
dilatory          2
distance          1
dizzy             1
donkey            1
drag              1
dragging          1
dreary            2
dressing          1
drive             1
driver            1
drone             1
Dr. R.            1
dull              7

ease              2
easy             63
Erie              1

fast            316
feeble            1
fine              1
fire              1
fly               1
foot              1
funeral           1

gait              3
gin               1
going             1

hard              2
haste             3
hasty             2
heavy             1
horse            14
hot               1
hurry             3

impatience        1
inactive          1
inanition         1
incessant         1
indecision        1
insect            1
invalid           2
irritating        1

laggard           1
lagging           1
lassitude         1
late              2
laziness          2
lazy             28
lecture           1
leisure           1
lingering         1
long              6

man               3
march             1
market            1

me                3
medium            1
mice              1
mind              1
mode              1
moderate          1
molasses         20
monotonous        1
moon              1
motion            7
motionless        1
move              1
movement          8
moving            5
Mr. T.            1
mule              3
music             3
myself            3

nasty             1
nature            1

obstacle          1
old               2
ox                2
oxen              1

pace              1
papa              1
person            8
Philadelphia      2
poke              1
poky              2
Poughkeepsie      1
pupil             1

quality           1
quick            55
quickly           2
quickness         1
quiet            12

rain              1
rapid             9
rhythmic          1
river             1
Rose              1
run               2

sharp             1
short             1
sick              1
sickness          1
slack             1

sloth             2
slowly            1
sluggish          7
smart            10
smooth            1
snail            62
snails            1
snake             1
softly            1
speech            2
speed             7
speedless         1
starting          1
step              2
still             3
stop              3
stubborn          1
stupid            7
subway            1
sure             27
swift             8
swing             1

talk              1
tardy             3
team              1
tedious           1

terrapin          1
thought           1
thoughtful        1
tide              1
time             14
tired             5
tiresome          2
tortoise          4
train            18
trains            1
trolley           1
turtle            9

unpleasant        2
unsatisfactory    1

vehicle           1

wagon             7
walk              8
walking           7
walks             1
water             1
waves             1
weak              2
weather           1
wheel             1
white             1
work              1
working           1
world             1
worm              3
writing           1

you               1


26. WISH

accomplish        1
accomplishment    1
achieve           1
Aladdin           1
ambition          2
angel             1
answer            1
anxiety           1
anxious           1
any               1
anything          7
apology           1
ardent            1
ask               8
asking            1
attain            1

baby              1
beg               2
benefit           1
best              1
better            1
bone             19
books             1
boy               1
boys              1
breakfast         1
brightness        1


candy             1
cannot            1
check             1
chicken           2
child             2
Christmas         3
clover            1
clovers           1
cold              1
come              2
comfort           4
command           9
conditions        1
cool              2
craving           1

demand            2
desirable         1
desire          197
desires           1
diamond           1
disappoint        1
disappointed      1
disappointment    3
dish              1
dislike           1
did               1
do                5
dog               1
doll              1
dollars           1
dream             2
dress             1
driving           1

eat               1
entreaty          1
enjoyment         1
examination       1
expectation       1
express           5
expression        1

fairy            11
fancy             2
farm              1
favor             5
feeling           1
finish            1
fish              1
fond              1
foolishness       1
for               5
fortune           2
fulfil            1
fulfilled         2
fulfilment        6
fun               1

gain              2
get              14
gift              4
girl              1
give              3
glad              1
go                4
gold              1
good             19
grant             7
granted          15
gratification     4
gratified         6
gratify          11
greetings         1
guess             2

happiness        18
happy             3
hard              1
hat               2
hate              1
have             18
health            6
hearty            1
heaven            3
heavens           1
help              1
home             12
hope             51
hoping            1
hopeful           2
house             1

idea              2
imagination       1
impossible        1
inclination       1

journey           2
joy               1

know              1

letter            2
like              8
liked             1
lonesome          1
long             10
longing          18
love              2
luck              9

make              1
marry             1
million           2
mind              4
money            32
moon              1
morning           1
music             1
myself            1

news              1
nice              1
no                1

obey              3
object            1
obtain            1
offer             1
one               1
opportunity       1
opposition        1
orange            1
order             1

perhaps           1
person            1
pick              1
picture           1
pie               1
plan              1
play              1
pleasant          1
pleasure          5
plenty            2
position          3
possess           1
possession        1
present           2
promise           2

quiet             1

reality           1
receive           1
remembrance       1
renown            1
repeat            1
request           8
rest              1
rich              1
riches            3
ring              1

sail              1
satisfactory      1
satisfied         2
satisfy           1
satisfying        1
say               2
secret            1
sincere           1
sleep             1
some              1
something        15
sorrow            1
sorry             1
speak             1
special           1
star              9
stars             2
strong            1
success           4
suggest           1
summer            2
sweetheart        1
swim              1

think            18
thinking          6
thought          47
toy               1
trip              1
trouble           1
true              6
try               1

unattainable      1
uncertain         1
unfulfilled       1
unlawful          1
unsatisfied       1

vacation          2

want             66
wants             1
wanted            1
wanting           9
waste             1
watch             1
water             1
wealth            2
well              6
will              3
wisdom            2
wise              1
wishbone         14
wonder            2
would             2
wouldn't          1

yes               1
you               1


27. RIVER

Amazon            1
Androscoggin      1

bank              1
banks             2
barrow            1
bathing           3
bay               1
beautiful         1
beauty            1
bend              1
blue              6
boat             20
boats             3
boating           1
body              1
bridge            2
broad             5
brook            20
bubbling          1

Calumet           1
camping           1
canal             1
canoe             3
canoeing          1
Chignagnette      1
cliffs            1
commerce          1
Connecticut       1
creek            10
current           8

dangerous         1
deep             35
Delaware          1
depth             1
drowned           1

East              4

fish              1
flow             24
flows             5
flowing          17
Freiberg          1
front             1

God               1
Grand             1
green             1

Hudson           33

island            1

Jordan            1

lake             65
lakes             1
land              5
large             7
launch            1
length            1
life              1
liquid            1
long              8

meadow            1
Mississippi       8
Mississquoi       1
Missouri          1
Mohawk            1
motion            1
mountain         10
moving            2

ocean            17
Ohio              2
Ottanqueehee      1
Owasco            1

Pacific           1
peace             2
Piscatague        1
plain             1
pleasure          1
pond              5

rain              1
Rappahannock      1
rapid             2
Rhine             1
rill              1
rivulet           2
rivulets          1
row               1
rowing            1
run               3
runs              3
running          11
rushing           1

Saco              1
sailing           4
salt              1

sea              14
shallow           2
Shannon           1
shining           1
ship              4
ships             1
side              1
sky               1
slow              2
small             1
smooth            7
spring            1
St. Lawrence      1
stream          117
streams           1
streamlet         1
strong            1
sunset            1
Susquehanna       2
swift             3
swim              4
swimming          4

Tay               1
tide              1
tree              1
tug               1
turbulence        1

valley            5

Ware              1
water           303
well              3
wet               2
white             3
wide              5
winding           2
winds             1


28. WHITE

almost            1
apron             2

baby              1
beach             1
beautiful         1
beauty            1
bird              1
black           308
bleached          1
blue              9
boat              1
Bob               1
body              1
bride             1
bright            4
brightness        1
Broadway          1
brown             2

cat               2
cerement          1
chair             1
chalk             3
cheerful          1
cherries          1
clean            10
cleanliness       2
cleanness         1
clear             2
cloth            17
clothing          1
cloud             4
clouds            2
coat              1
color           170
colored           1
colorless        11
cotton            3
cream             1
curtain           2
curtains          1

dark             35
darkness          1
day               1
daylight          1
dazzling          2
delicate          1
dove              2
dress            34
dresses           1

easy              2
evening           1

face              1
feathers          2
flag              2
flower            2

garment           2
ghost             1
glare             1
good              1
gray              2
green             6

hall              1
handkerchief      2
hands             1
hard              1
horse             2
house             4

innocence         1

lady              1
lawn              1
lead              1
lemon             1
lie               1
light            51
linen             3
lovely            1

man               2
marble            1
milk              9
Mountain          1
Mountains         1
muslin            8

napkin            1
nearly            1
nice              2

paint             5
pale              2
paper            17
pencil            1
person            2
pigeon            1
pink              2
pleasing          1
powder            1
pretty            1
pure             20
purity           19

race              1
red               7
restful           1
retired           1
ribbon            1
rightness         1
rose              2

sand              1
Sarah             1
shade             1
sheet             6
shoes             1
shroud            1
silvery           1
simple            1
skirt             1
sky               2
snow             91
snowflake         1
snowy             1
soft              1
soul              1
space             1
spread            1
still             2
summer            1
sunlight          1
swan              1

tablecloth        4
tent              1
tile              1
trees             1
trousers          1

waist             2
wall              6
wash              1
wedding           2

yellow            7


29. BEAUTIFUL

admirable         1
admiring          1
aesthetic         1
all               1
ancient           1
appearance        2
art               6
article           1
artistic          1
attractive        1

baby              1
bird              1
birds             1
brilliant         1
building          1
butterfly         2

carpet            1
carving           1
charming          7
child             6
city              1
classic           1
clear             1
clouds            1
color             1
colors            1
comely            3
common            1
complexion        3
conceited         1
country           3
curtain           1

dainty            1
day               7
delicious         1
delightful        5
description       1
desire            1
divine            1
dress             2

earth             1
elegant           5
enjoyed           1
ethereal          1
Eunice            2
Evelyn            1
everything        1
exquisite         4
eye               1
eyes              2

face              3
fair              5
falls             1
fancy             2
fascinating       1
fine              8
flower           13
flowers          42
foliage           1
forest            1
Formosa           1
fragrant          1
friend            2

gift              1
girl             24
glorious          2
God               2
good              4
gorgeous          2
graceful          1
grand            40
grandeur          2
grass             1
grounds           1

hand              1
handsome         86
happy             1
hard              1
hateful           1
heaven            2
heavens           1
hideous           1
hills             2
homely           27
horrible          1

joy               1

kind              1

lady              5
lake              1
landscape         7
lightness         1
long              1
look              1
looks             1
looking           1
lovable           2
lovely           64
luxurious         1

magnificent      10
maiden            2
man               2
mansion           1
money             1
morning           1
mountain          2
mountains         6
music             4
myself            1

nature           16
Niagara           1
nice             73
nicely            1
night             1
noble             1

object            1
ocean             3

Palisades         2
pansies           1
park              1
peacock           3
perception        1
perfect           3
perfection        1
person            2
picture          19
pictures          4
place             1
plain             2
pleasant         14
pleasing         16
pleasure          2
pretty          113

queen             1

rainbow           1
religion          1
resplendent       1
ribbon            1
rich              1
robin             1
rose              6
roses             2

sad               1
satisfaction      1
scarce            1
scene             1
scenery          23
school            1
sculpture         1
sensitive         1
shapely           1
sight             1
sky              16
soft              1
sometimes         1
soothing          1
sorrowful         1
splendid          8
statue            1
straw             1
summer            2
sun               1
sunset            8
sunshine          1
superb            1
supreme           1
sweet             4
symphony          1

things            2
tree              4
trees            10

ugliness          2
ugly             66

vanity            1
verdure           1
violets           1

weather           4
wife              1
woman            29
women             1
wonderful         1
world             2

you               1


30. WINDOW

air              12
airing            1
airy              1
aperture          2
awning            1

bars              1
blind             4
breeze            1
bright            3
broken            2

cage              1
casing            3
children          1
church            1
clean             6
cleaner           1
clear             7
colored           1
cool              1
curtain          13
curtains          4

danger            1
dirty             2
door             57
doors             1
doorway           1
draught           1

eyes              1

few               1
frame             5

garden            1
glass           316
glasses           1

hole              4
home              1
house            22

joyful            1

landscape         2
large            11
lattice           2
ledge             1
light           186
look             15
looking           5
low               1

Newcastle         1

object            1
open             19
opened            1
opening          16
outdoors          1
outlook           5

pane             82
panes             6
picture           1
porch             1

rain              1
rock              1
room              3

sash             20
scene             2
scenery           3
school            2
screen            1
screens           1
seat              1
see               9
shade             8
shades            2
shed              1
shining           1
sight             7
sightly           1
sill             13
sky               1
skylight          3
small             1
square            1
stained           2
stop              1
street            1
structure         1
sun               3
sunshine          2

thing             1
translucent       1
transom           1
transparent      24
trees             2

useful            2

vast              1
ventilation       5
ventilator        2
view             15
viewing           1
visible           1
vision            1

wall              4
wash              1
wide              2
winter            2
wood              1



31. ROUGH

bad               4
bag               1
ball              1
basket            1
bear              1
blisters          1
blow              1
board            10
boards            1
boisterous        4
bold              2
boy               4
boys              4
bristle           1
brush             2
brutal            3
brutality         1
bumpy             1

calm              2
careless          1
carpet            2
chaps             1
cloth             4
coarse           29
coarseness        1
cobblestones      1
cold              1
country           2
crooked           2
cross             1
cruel             1

desert            1
difficult         1
dirt              1
disagreeable      8
discomfort        1
discouraging      1
dog               1
dress             1
dry               3
dull              1

earth             2
easy              2
even              2
land              1
face              1
fast              1
file              7
fine              2
floor             6
football          2
forest            1

gambler           1
genteel           1
gentle            8
girl              1
granite           1
granular          1
grater            1
grating           1
gravel            1
ground            8

hairy             1
hall              1
hand              2
hard             38
hardness          1
harsh            10
harshness         1
haste             1
hill              2
hills             2
hilly             5
horrid            1
house             1
porcupine         1
ice               3
impertinent       1
injurious         1
iron              2
irregular         2

jagged            1

knife             1

late              1

level             3
lurk              1
lump              1

man               8
manner            1
manners           1
material          1
me                1
mean              1
mild              3
mountain          6
mountains         1

nice              1
noisy             1

obstetricians     1
ocean            27
orange            1

paper             1
pavement          1
peasant           1
pebbles           1
person            2
picture           1
pineapple         1
plane             2
plank             1
play              1
poor              1
stern             1
push              1
stone            12
quality           1
quiet             1
quite             1

radiator          1
ragged            5
railway           1
rasp              1
ready             5
refined           1
rider             1
riders            1
river             1
road             21
roads             5
rock             10
rocks            10
rocky            12
rowdy             1
ruddy             1
rude              7
rudeness          1
rug               1
rugged           22
ruggedness        1
Russian           1
rut               1

sand              5
sandpaper        13
savage            1
sea              15
sedate            1
scratch           1
shock             1
sliver            1
slow              1
smooth          346
smoothness        2
soft              4
sponge            1
west              1
sticky            1
wind              2
stones            3
stony             7
storm             5
stormy            1
straight          1
street            3
surface           6

table             4
tempestuous       1
tongue            2
touch             2
tough             2
towel             1
tramp             4
trouble           1
tumble            1
turbulent         1

ugly              4
uncomfortable     4
uncouth           4
uneasy            1
uneven           38
unfairness        1
unfinished        1
unpleasant        7
unsatisfactory    1
untaught          1

voices            1
voyage            2
vulgar            5

walk              2
wall              1
washing           1
water            21
waves             5
weary             1
weather           4

wild              2

winds             1
wood              7
woodsman          1
work              1
world             1
wrong             1


32. CITIZEN

alien            14
America           5
American         35
Americans         3
army              1
arrived           1

belong            4
belonging         1
beloved           1
beneficial        1
bird              1
born              3
Brooklyn          1
brother           1
business          1

C.                1
candidate         1
capital           1
cat               1
cistern           1
citizeness        1
city             27
civies            4
civilian          2
civilized         4
clothes           1
club              1
commander         1
community         3
comrade           1
conspirators      1
constitution      1
cosmopolitan      1
countrified       1
country          17
countryman        7
criticise         1

democrat          1
duties            2
duty              3
dweller           1
dwelling          1

ear               1
election          1
eligible          1
emigrant          2
emigration        1

F.                1
faithful          1
farm              1
farmer            3


fellow            3
fellowship        2
fine              1
five              2
fool              1
foreign           1
foreigner        12
free              1
freeman           2
friend            1
friendship        1

gardener          1
gentleman         8
German            3
good             26
government        6
green             1

helper            1
home              3
honest            3
honor             1
honorable         2
human             3

I                 1
immigrant         1
independence      1
indian            1
individual        4
inhabit           1
inhabitant       23
invader           1
Italian           1

justice           2

K.                1
king              1

large             1


law              11
laws              1
lawyer            3
leader            1
leading           1
legislature       1
Lincoln           1
little            1
live              1
lives             1
loyal             3

male              7
man             278
manhood           1
mayor             5
me                1
member            5
men               2
merry             1
moral             1
Mr. A.            1
Mr. C.            1
Mr. S.            1
municipal         1
myself            1

name              1
nationality       1
native           25
natural           1
naturalization    1
naturalized       5
navy              1
near              1
neighbor          3
newspaper         1
New York          4
noble             1
nobleman          2
nonsense          1

obedient          1
obey              1
occupant          1
office            2
officer           1
old               1
orderly           1
outlaw            1

paper             2
papers            2
patrician         1
patriot           2
patriotic         2
peasant           1
people           41
person           64
plebeian          1
policeman         2
politician        4
politicians       1
politics          8
poor              1
president         4
proud             1

relative          1
republic          3
republican        1
residence         2
resident         20
respectable       1
revolution        1
righteousness     1
Roman             2
Roosevelt         2
ruler             1

season            1
ship              1
soldier           5
state            10
statesman         5
stationed         1
straight          1
subject           5
suburban          1
suffrage          3
suffragette       2

Taft              3
Tammany           1
taxes             1
Teddy             1
thoughtful        1
tough             1
town              5
townsman          5

undesirable       2
unit              1
United States    19
useful            2

village           2
vote             13
voting            4
Voter            35

Washington        1
woman             2
work              2

years             1


33. FOOT


anatomy           2
animal            2
ankle            11
appendage         2
arm              11

baby's            1
base              1
bicycle           1
big               2
black             3
body             34
bone              4
bones             5
boot              6
bottom            1
broken            1
brown             1

careful           1
comfort           3
corn              3
corns             2

dainty            1
difficult         1
distance          1

expansive         1
extremity         9

finger            1
firm              1
flat              1
flesh             6
football          1
foundation        3

gear              1
girls             1
going             1
good              1
ground            2

hand            185
hands             5
head              7
heel              3
help              1
helper            1
horse             1
house             1
human             1
humility          1
hurt              1

inch              3
inches            2

kick              4
knee              2

labor             1
lame              1
large            14
leg              54
legs              1
length            2
limb             58
long              2

man               5
measure           3
member           10
mine              1
Miss F.           1
movement          2
music             1

nail              1
naked             1
necessity         2
needful           1

organ             1

pain              1
painful           1
part              2
pavement          1
pedal             3
pedant            1
pedestal          1
pedestrian        1
person            5
plaster           1

quadruped         2

rheumatism        1
right             1
rubber            1
rule              4
ruler             1
run               2

shape             1
shoe            146
shoes            17
short             4
size              1
skin              1
slipper           2
small            22
sole              1
sore              8
speed             1
stability         1
stand             6
standing          1
standard          1
step              6
stepping          1
stocking          2
stone             1
strength          1
strong            1
stumps            1
support           1
swiftness         1

three             1
tired             5
toe              30
toes             41
travel            2
trod              1
twelve            1
two               1

useful            5

velocity          1

walk            106
walking          38
warm              1

yard              1


34. SPIDER


abhorrence        1
afraid            1
animal           38
annoyance         1
ant               3
arachnida         2
arachnoid         1
awful             1

bee               3
bees              2
beetle            4
big               1
bird              2
bite             20
black             8
breakfast         1
bug              58
bugs              2
butterfly         5

camp              1
caterpillar       3
centipede         1
chills            1
climb             1
cobweb           12
cobwebs           2
country           1
crawl            14
crawls            1
crawling         11
crawly            1
creature          2
creep             6
creeps            1
creeping          7
creepiness        1
creepy            5
cricket           2
cringe            1
cross             1
crow              1
cunning           1

daddy-long-legs   1
danger            1
dangerous         4
dark              2
dirty             1
disagreeable      3
displeasure       1
dread             1

evil              1

fear              3
fish              1
flies             4
fly             136
fright            1
fry               1
frying            1

grass             1

harlequin         1
harmful           1
horrible          1
horrid            4
horror            3

industry          1
insect          276

jumping           1

large             5
leg               3
legs             27
loathsome         1
long              1

Miss Muffet       1
mosquito          1
moth              1
movements         1

nasty             3
nest              1
net               2
nuisance          1

objectionable     1
obnoxious         1
octopus           1

pain              1
pan               1
pest              1
poison           10
poisonous         1
pretty            1

rats              1
Robert Bruce      2
roach             1
room              1

shivers           1
shudder           1
sinister          1
small             2
snake             1
snakes            1
sparrow           1
sting             7
stings            1
stung             1
study             1

tarantula         3
thing             1
thread            2
tortoise          1
treachery         1
tree              1

ugly              6
undesirable       1
unpleasant        1

venomous          2
vermin            1

walk              1
wall              1
wasp              6
watching          1
weaves            2
weaving           1
web             188
webs              3
wiggly            1
worm              4

young             1


35. NEEDLE



article           3

blood             1
book              2
broken            1
button            1
buttons           1

camel             1
cloth             4
clothes           2
coat              2
cotton            7
crocheting        1
cut               1

darning           4
diligence         1
dressmaker        2

embroidery        1
eye              17

fine              3

handy             1
help              1
hole              1
home              1
housewife         1
hurt              2
hypodermic        2

implement         5
industry          2
instrument       26
knitting          4

labor             1
long              1

magnetic          1
material          1
mending           1
metal             3

nail              1

ornament          1

patching          1
pin             147
pins             11
pincushion        1
point            50
pointed           9
prick            10
pricks            1
pricking          2

sew             134
sews              1
sewing          107

sharp           152
sharpness         4
shiny             1
slippers          1
small             2
steel            53
sting             2
stitching         1
surgeon           1

tailor            1
thick             2
thimble          15
thin              2
thread          100
tool              5

use               1
using             1
useful           12

weapon            1
wire              1
woman             1
work              6



36. RED

aggravating       1
anarchist         1
anger             2
apple            13
apples            3

ball              1
banner            1
barn              2
beauty            2
becoming          1
black            61
blood            71
bloody            1
blossom           1
blue             99
book              8
bravery           1
brick             3
bricks            2
bright           40
brightness        2
brilliant         3
brook             1
brown             7
building          1
bull              2

cap               1
cape              1
carpet            1
ceiling           1
cheeks            1
cheer             1
cherries          1
closet            1
cloth             8
clouds            1
coat              2
color           254
colors            1
colored           1
coloring          1
comfortable       1
Cornell           1
cow               1
crimson           2
curtain           2

danger           14
dark              6
dashy             1
dislike           1
dress            18

eat               1
Ed                1

fiery             2
fire             81
flag             16
flannel           3
flashy            1
fright            1
flower            2
flowers           1
flushing          1

garment           1
garnet            3
gaudy             1
glaring           2
glass             1
globe             1
glow              1
grass             1
green            30

hair              6
handsome          1
hat               1
head              2
healthy           1
heat              4
Hereford          1
holly             1
hood              1
horse             1
hot               5
house             2

Indian            2
ink               4
iron              1

jacket            1

lavender          1
light             1
lips              1

maroon            1
Mars              1
mixture           1
moon              1

object            1
objectionable     1
offensive         1
orange            1

paint             5
paper             4
passion           1
pencil            1
pink              1
plush             1
poinsettia        1
pretty            2
purple            6


ribbon            3
riding            1
robin             3
rose             15
rosy              3
rug               2

scarlet           3
shoe              1
sky               2
smooth            1
soldier           1
spots             1
story             1
sun               5
sunset            3
sweater           1

tablecloth        1
thread            4
tie               1
tomatoes          1
turkey            2

vivid             1

war               1
warm              6
warmth            3
whiskey           1
white            97
wool              1
world             1

yarn              1
yellow           15



37. SLEEP

awake            94
awaking           1
awaken            3
awakening         1

baby              2
beautiful         1
bed              75
bedstead          1

calm              2
chance            1
child             2
children          1
coma              1
comfort          30

dead              2
death             7
deep              5
desire            1
desperate         1
dope              1
dormitory         2
dose              1
doze              4
dream            28
dreams           10
drowsy            6
drowsiness        3
dullness          1

ease              3
easy              4
eat               4
enjoyable         1
enjoyment         1
enough            1
experiment        1
eyes             10

fast              1
fatigue           2
fine              1
forgetfulness     2

gentle            1
girl              1
go                1
good              5

habit             1
happiness         1
health            3
heavy             1
home              1

insomnia          2

lady              1
leisure           1
lain              1
lie               3
living            1
luxurious         1
luxury            1

mesmerism         1
midnight          1
myself            1

natural           1
necessary         4

need              1
needful           1

nice              1
night            40

peace             1
peaceful          1
peacefulness      2
perfect           1
pillow            5
pleasant          3
plenty            1
poorly            1
potassium         1
profound          2


quiet             8
quietness         2
quietude          1

rage              1
recline           2
reclining         1
refreshing        7
refreshment       2
relax             1
repose           31
rest            300
resting          14
restful           9
restless          4
restore           1
restorer          2
retiring          1
rise              1
rising            1

senses            1
Shakespeare       1
sheet             1
shut              1
silence           1
sleeplessness     1
sleepy            1
slumber          20
slumbering        2
snore             4
soft              1
solace            1
song              1
soothing          2
sound            16
soundly           3
still             2
sweet             3

thinking          1
tired            26
tiresome          1

unconscious      12
unconsciousness   7

wake             60
wakefulness       4
wakened           1
wakening          1
waking            4

walk              2
wanting           1
watchful          1
weariness         3
weary             1
well              1
woman             1



38. ANGER

abuse             1
aggravated        1
aggravation       2
agony             1
amiability        2
amiable           1
angry             6
anguish           2
annoyance         1
annoyed           3
appearance        1
aroused           1
awful             1

bad              13
bitter            2
bitterness        3
blow              1
blows             1
blush             1
boy               3
breathing         1

calm              7
calmness          1
cat               2
catching          1
cause             2
character         1
cheer             1
child             1
children          1
choler            1
cold              1
command           3
compose           1
control           5
cool              1
cranky            1
crazy             1
cross            44
crossness         2
covetous          1
cruel             1
cry               1

danger            1
deliberation      1
despise           1
devil             1
disagreeable      4
disappointed      1
disappointment    2
discomfort        3
dishonor          1
dislike           1
disobedience      1
disobedient       1
displeased        2
displeasure       2
disturbance       3
disturbed         5
dog               4
downhearted       1
duel              1

emotion           3
enemy             2
energy            1
enmity            1
excitability      1
excited           3
excitement        4
exclamation       1

face              1
father            1
fear              9
feeling           4
ferocity          1
fierce            1
fiery             1
fight             8
fighting          1
fist              1
flush             1
foolish           1
foolishness       3
force             1
forgive           1
forgiveness       3
frenzy            1
fret              1
fright            1
frown             1
frowning          1
fun               1
furious           2
fury              4

gentle            2
gentleness        3
giant             1
girl              1
glad              4
gladness          2
good              2
great             1
grief             3
grieve            1
grouchy           2

happiness         4
happy             2
harsh             3
haste             2
hasty             3
hate              9
hateful           1
hatred           26
headache          1
horrid            1
horror            1
hot               3
hot-headed        1
house             1
humor             1
hunger            1
hysteria          1

ill               1
impatience        4
impatient         3
Indian            1
indignant         1
indignation       2
insanity          1
insult            1
insulted          1
intense           1
intensity         1
intoxication      1
ire               2
irritable         1

jealousy          1
Jimmy             1
joy               4
joyful            1
judgement         1

kind              2
kindness          2

laughter          1
light             1
lion              2
little            1
loud              3
love              5
low               1

mad             121
maddest           1
madness          19
malice            2
man               6
mean              1
meekness          4
mild              1
mind              4
mirth             2
myself            2

name              1
nature            1
nerves            1
nervous           1
never             1
nice              1
noise             2
noisy             1
none              1
nonsense          1
not               1
noticeable        1

obey              1
out               1
outrage           1

pain              1
passion          51
passionate        1
patience          3
peace             6
peaceful          1
peevish           1
person            2
placid            1
pleasant          5
pleasure          4
provocation       2
provoke           1
provoked          1
provoking         2

quarrel           3
quarreling        2
quarrelsome       1
quick             4
quickness         1
quiet             6
quietness         1
quite             1


rage             16
rarely            1
rashly            1
rashness          1
raving            1
reason            1
red               3
remorse           1
resentment        2
resistive         1
rest              1
restless          1
revenge           8
riled             2
rough             3
roughness         1
rude              1

sad               1
scold             2
scolding          2
scowl             1
sedative          1
selfishness       1
sharp             1
shorn             1
sick              1
sin               1
slow              1
smooth            2
sober             1
soft              1
soldier           1
sometimes         1
soothing          1
sorrow           10
spite             1
spiteful          1
storm             1
strike            1
strong            1
suffering         1
sulky             1
swear             1
sweetness         1
sword             1

talking           1
teacher           2
tears             1
temper          149
temperament       1
terrible          1
terror            1
thought           3
torment           1
trouble           6
turbulent         1
turmoil           1

ugliness          1
ugly              4
unbecoming        1
uncomfortable     1
unhealthy         1
unpleasant        4

very              1
vexation          3
vexed            13
vicious           1
violence          1
violent           2
voice             1

war               1
wicked            5
wickedness        1
wish              1
woman             4
words             1
wrath            52
wrathful          1
wroth             2
wrong             4

yelling           1



39. CARPET

appearance        1
article           1

beat              1
beating           2
beater            1
beautiful         2
beautifying       1
beauty            2
bedroom           1
blue              2
bright            2
broom             1
brown             2
brush             1
brushes           1
Brussels         14

chair             1
chairs            1
clean             3
cleaning          2
cleaner           1
cloth            20
color             6
colors            1
comfort          15
comfortable       8
cotton            2
cover            27
covering         76
curtains          1

dark              1
design            6
designer          1
dirt              2
down              1
drag              1
dullness          1
dust              4
duster            1


ease              3
electric          1
expense           1

fancy             2
figure            3
flat              1
floor           256
flooring          2
foot              2
fur               1
furnishing        1
furniture         4


germs             1
good              2
goods             4
grain             1
gray              1
green             8

hall              1
heavy             3
home              4
house             4

ingrain           2

lay               1
loom              1
lot               1
luxury            3

mat               6
material          3
matting          10
mattress          1
microbes          1
moss              1

nail              1
neatness          1
nice              2
none              1

oilcloth          7
oriental          1
ornament          2

parlor            3
pattern           1
pennant           1
pleasant          1
plush             2
pretty            4
protection        2

quick             1

rag               7
rags              3
ragged            1
red               8
reddish           1
refinement        1
rich              1
room             17
rough             2
rug             163
rugs             14

shoes             1
small             1
smooth            8
soft             78
softness          4
stairs            2
stove             1
straw             1
sweep             7
sweeping          3
sweeper          10

table             1
tack              8
tacks             8
tapestry          2
textile           2
thread            2
tread             2

use               2
useful            1

velvet            9

walk             15
walking           6
wall              1
Wanamaker         1
warm              2
warmth            5
weaver            1
weaving           1
wear              1
white             1
wide              1
wood              1
wool             10
woolen            7
worsted           1
woven             2


40. GIRL

ankles            1
Annie             1
associate         1

baby              1
Beatrice          1
beautiful         8
beauty            6
being             9
belt              1
big               1
biped             1
blonde            1
blooming          1
book              1
boy             350
boys              3
braids            2
bright            1

changeable        1
cheerful          1
child            49
children          2
childhood         2
childish          1
choice            1
class             1
classmate         1
clever            1
clothes           4
clothing          1
Coleen            1
college           1
companion         2
cook              1
cunning           1
curls             2
cute              2

dainty            2
damsel            1
dance             1
dancing           1
daughter          2
delight           1
diabolo           1
domestic          1
Doris             1
Dorothy           1
dream             1
dress             8
dresses           4

Effle             1
Ethel             1
eyes              1

fair              1
fellow            2
female           77
feminine          3
flesh             3
flirtation        1
Frances           1
friend            7
futurity          1

garden            1
gay               1
gentility         1
gentle            1
Gertrude          1
good              6
grace             1

hair              3
hand              1
handsome          5
happiness         1
harmlessness      1
has               1
hat               3
head              1
here              1
hood              1
hoop              1
human             7
humanity          1

immature          1
infant            2
innocence         3
innocent          1
intelligent       1
Irene             1

jealousy          1
jolly             2
joy               2

kid               1

lady             20
large             1
lassie            1
learning          1
little            3
lively            1
Lizzie            1
love              2
loving            1
lovely            4

maid              7
maiden           13
maidenhood        1
malt              1
man               7
men               1
meek              1
mischievious      1
miss              4
Miss S.           1
modesty           1
mother            2
myself            3

neat              2
necessity         2
nice             11
niece             2
noise             1

Pelar             1
person           18
petticoats        1
play              2
pleasure          4
pretty           29
pupil             1

quick             1

rarely            1
running           1

saucy             1
school           19
servant           3
sex               4
shirk             1
silly             4
sister            6
sixteen           2
skirts            1
slender           1
slight            1
slim              1
small             8
smart             1
smartness         1
student           1
studious          1
study             3
stylish           1
summer            1
sweet             4
sweetness         1
sweetheart        2

talks             1
tall              4
thoughtless       1

ugly              1
useful            1

vanity            1
virgin            2

walk              1
water             1
weak              2
white             1
wife              1
woman            61

young            31
youngster         1
youth            24



41. HIGH

above             9
air               5
Alps              1
altitude         14
ascend            1

bank              1
beam              1
beanstalk         1
big               3
bridge            1
building         24
buildings         2

Cathedral         1
ceiling           4
chair             2
church            2
cliff             1
climb             1
climbing          1
clouds            7

deep              5
depth             4
dimension         1
distance         11
distant           3
dizzy             2

elevated         11
elevation         2
erect             1
exalted           2
extended          1

fall              3
falling           2
far               1
fast              1
fear              2
feet              1
fence             3
first             1

giant             2
great             1

hat               1
heaven            1
heavens           3
heavenward        1
height           14
hill             20
hills             4
hot               1
house            24
houses            1

ideal             1
ideas             1
immense           1

jump              2

kite              1

ladder            2
large             5
length            7
lighthouse        1
lofty            20
long              7
low             328

magnificent       1
man               1
mast              2
measure           1
medium            3
Metropolitan      1
mind              1
monument          2
mount             1
mountain        157
mountains        16
myself            1

notion            1

peak              4
pine              1
pinnacle          1
play              1
pole              8
power             1
precipice         3

reach             2
rich              1
rocky             1
roof              3
room              1

see               1
shallow           1
short             3
skies             1
sky              17
skyscraper        2
small             1
soft              1
spire             1
staff             1
stand             1
steep            13
steeple          12
stick             1
stone             1
summit            1
swing             2

tall             57
temperature       1
temple            1
top               5
tower            12
tree             19
trees             4

up               26
upward            1

valley            1
vision            1

wall              5
waves             1
wind              2
woman             1



42. WORKING

accomplish        1
accomplishment    1
active            3
activity          1
always            1
ambition          1
ambitious         5
anxious           1
apron             1
attendant         1

bent              1
book              1
boy               2
broom             2
business          6
busy             51

carpenter         1
class             3
comfort           1
complication      1
content           2
continually       2
continuous        1
cooking           1

day               6
difficult         1
digging           1
diligence         1
discomfort        1
do                2
doing            10
done              1
drawing           1
driving           1
drudge            1
dusting           1
duties            1
duty              2

earning           2
ease              2
easiness          1
easy              4
eating            2
effort            1
employed         10
employers         1
employment        4
energetic         2
energy            3
engaged           2
English           1
essay             1
exercise         15
exercising        1
exertion          3

factory           3
fair              2
faithfully        1
farm              1
fast              1
father            3
fatigue           7
fatigued          2
field             1
flowers           1
foundry           1
function          1

girl              2
good              4

hammer            2
hands             3
happiness         1
hard            105
health            2
healthy           1
hoeing            1
horse             2
hour              1
house             1

idle             44
idleness         10
idling            2
inconvenience     1
indolent          1
industrious      13
industry          8
intelligent       1
interest          1
Italian           2
job               1

keeping           1

labor           147
laboring         20
labors            1
laborer           5
lack              1
ladies            1
late              1
laziness          2
lazy             18
leisure           1
Lillie            1
little            1
live              1
livelihood        2
living            5
loaf              1
loafing           5
loafer            1
lounging          1

machine           2
machinery         1
machinist         1
making            1
man              50
men               6
model             1
money             4
morning           1
motion            3
movement          2
moving            5
mowing            1
myself            2

necessary         4
necessity         1
neighbor          1
never             1
night             1
noble             1
nothing           1
nursing           1

obstetrics        1
occupation       13
occupied          1
occupy            1
order             2

paid              1
patients          1
people            5
person            2
perspiration      1
play              8
playing          22
pleasant          1
pleasure          4
plow              1
plowing           1
policy            1
position          1
possession        1
prosperous        1

quick             1

railroad          1
reading           1
recreation        1
rest             17
resting          24
result            1
rowing            1
running           3

salary            1
satisfaction      1
saving            1
school            6
scrubbing         3
servant           2
setting           1
sewing            7
shirking          2
shop              7
shorthand         1
sickness          1
singing           1
sitting           3
slave             4
slavery           1
slaving           1
sleep             2
sleeping          8
slow              1
smart             1
starving          1
steady            2
stenographer      1
strenuous         2
struggle          1
study             5
studying          5
sweep             1
sweeping          3
swift             1

table             1
task              2
thinking          1
thought           1
time              1
tired            28
tiresome          3
tiring            1
to-day            1
toil              7
toiling           8
tools             2
treadmill         1
trouble           1
trying            2
typewriter        1

unemployed        2
useful            2

wages             4
walking           2
washerwoman       1
washing           5
weariness         1
willing           2
woman             2
work              1
workman           1
world             1
writing           2



43. SOUR

acetic            1
acid             23
acrid             1
anger             1
angry             1
apple            27
apples           10
astringent        1

bad               6
beer              1
bitter           70
bitterness        1

cherries          3
cider             2
cross             1
crowd             1
currants          1

dangerous         1
death             1
delight           1
disagreeable     18
dislike           1
disposition       3
distasteful       4
drink             1

face              1
flavor            1
fruit             3

gall              1
good              4
goodness          1
grape             3
grapes           36
grapefruit        2
green             1

hate              1
hurts             1

juice             1

kraut             2

lemon            78
lemons           17
lime              1

man               1
milk             31

nasty             3
naturally         1
nice              3
no                1
nourishing        1

odor              1
orange            2

painful           1
persimmon         1
pickle           15
pickles          20
pleasant          1
plum              1
plums             1
pucker            3

quince            3

rancid            1
repulsive         1
rhubarb           5
rough             1

salt              2
salty             1
sauerkraut        2
sear              1
sharp             2
soft              1
song              1
spoiled           1
stomach           1
sugar             2
sweet           349

tart             17
taste            55
tasting           2
tasteless         2
teeth             1
turned            1
twinge            1

ugly              4
unhappy           1
unpalatable       3
unpleasant       16
unpleasantness    1
unsweetened       1

vinegar          91

wholesome         1
wine              1




44. EARTH

agriculture       1
air               3
ashes             1

ball              4
beautiful         3
big               2
black             7
body              1
broken            2
brown            17
building          1

cemetery          1
clay             71
climate           1
cloud             1
coffin            1
cold              2
color             1
Columbus          2
continent         1
corn              2
country           2
cover             1
creation          1
crunching         1
crushed           1
crust             5

damp              5
dark             10
delve             1
depth             2
dig               1
digging           2
dirt            115
dirty             4
dogs              1
dry               4
dust              9

farm              3
farming           1
fence             1
fertile           1
fertilized        1
field             4
fields            1
flag              1
floor             3
flower            1
flowers           8
foot              1
foundation        1
fresh             1
fruitful          1
Fuller's          1

garden            8
geranium          1
globe            16
grain             2
grand             1
grass            11
grave             3
gravel            2
gravity           1
great             2
green             3
greenhouse        1
ground          166
growth            1

habitation        2
hard              4
heaven           31
heavens           1
heavy             2
hell              1
hemisphere        1
home              3
house             1
huge              1

inhabitable       1

land             28
large             7
level             1
live              3
living            2
loam              3
lot               1
low               2

man               1
map               2
Mars              3
mass              1
material          1
matter            1
metal             1
mine              1
mineral           1
moist             3
moon             11
mother            6
mould             2
mouldy            1
mountain          4
mountains         2
mud              16

nature            4

object            1
ocean             1
one               1
orange            1

paradise          1
place             1
planet           17
plant             2
plants            5
planting          1
pleasure          1
potential         1
productive        1
put               1

rain              1
rampart           1
rest              1
revolution        1
rich              4
river             1
road              1
rock              2
rocks             2
round            61
roundness         1

sand              5
sky              81
smelly            1
smooth            3
sod               2
soft              5
soil             37
solid             1
solidity          2
space             1
sphere            4
star              1
stone             2
stones            2
street            1
substance         1
sun               4
surface           3

travel            1
tree              4
trees             5

unfertile         1
universe          8

vastness          1
vegetable         1

walk              3
water            10
wide              1
wood              1
world            46
worm              5
worms             2


45. TROUBLE

accident          2
affliction        4
aggravation       3
anger             6
angry             6
anguish           1
annoy             1
annoyed           2
annoyance         5
anxiety          15
avoid             2

bad              11
begins            1
black             1
borrowed          1
borrows           1
bother            4
bothered          2
bothersome        1
brains            1
brewing           1
broke             1
burden            1
burdens           1
business          1
busy              1


calm              1
calmness          1
care             27
cares             3
careless          1
children          4
college           1
comfort           6
comforts          1
comfortable       1
coming            2
consequences      1
contented         2
contentment       1
court             1
cry               1
crying            1

danger            6
darkness          1
day               1
death            16
deep              2
despair           2
difficult         1
difficulties      1
difficulty        1
disagreeable      1
disagreement      2
disappoint        1
disaster          3
discomfort        7
discontent        2
disease           3
dislike           2
disobedience      1
displeased        1
displeasing       1
displeasure       2
dissatisfactory   1
distress          7
disturbed         2
doctor            1
dogs              1

ease              4
easiness          1
easy              1
ended             1
enemies           1
enemy             1
error             1
everywhere        1
exams             1
excited           1
excitement        2

family            3
father            1
fear              3
feeling           1
few               1
fight             5
fighting          2


flunking          1
fret              1
friends           1
fun               1
funeral           1
fuss              3

girl              2
gossip            2
great             2
grief            26

handkerchief      1
happiness        19
happy             8
hard              5
hardship          6
harm              1
health            3
heart             1
heaviness         1
hemorrhage        1
home              2
horror            1
horse             1
hurried           1
husband           1

idea              1
illness           2
imaginary         1
inconvenience     2

joy               9

kindness          1
kinds             1

labor             1
laugh             1
lawyer            1
lessons           1
life              2
little            1
lonesome          1
loss              1
lots              5

mad               2
madness           1
man               5
many              1
marriage          2
me                2
mind             10
minded            1
mischief          8
miserable         1
misery           14
misfortune        6
misunderstanding  1
money             4
monotony          1
mother            1
Mrs. Wiggs        1
much              5

nervousness       1
no                3
noise             2
none              4
nuisance          1

pain             20
patience          2
patient           2
patients          1
peace            15
peaceful          3
people            3
perplexed         1
perplexity        1
person            3

pity              1
pleasure         10
plenty            1
poor              2
poverty           2
psychologist      1

quarrel           3
quarreling        3
quiet             3
quietness         1

release           1
relief            1
remorse           1
rest              1
reverses          2
Romeo             1
ruffled           1

sad               6
sadness          13
school            1
scrape            1
sea               1
seldom            1
sereneness        1
shadow            1
ship              1
shooting          1
sickness         47
simple            1
sin               1
sleep             1
sometimes         1
sorrow          202
sorrows           1
sorrowful         4
sport             1
squabble          1
study             1
suffer            1
suffering         1
sweetener         1
sympathy          2

table             1
task              1
tears             9
teasing           1
temper            1
temptation        1
thought           2
thoughts          1
torment           1
travel            1
trial             1
trials            3
troublesome       5

ugly              1
unavoidable       1
uncertainty       1
uncomfortable     2
uneasiness        6
uneasy            6
unfortunate       2
unhappiness      13
unhappy           8
unlucky           1
unnecessary       2
unpleasant        6
unpleasantness    3
unrest            1
unsafe            1
unsatisfactory    2
unsettled         1
upset             2

want              1
war               2
weak              1
weary             3
weeping           2
welfare           1
woe               1
woman             5
women             1
work              8
worked            1
working           1
worried           3
worries           2
worry            65
worrying          1
worriment         5
wrinkles          2
wrong             2

yesterday         1
youth             1


46. SOLDIER

academy           1
armlet            1
army            137
arms              3
Arnold            1
artillery         2

baseball          1
battle            8
bayonet           1
blood             1
blue              1
boy              23
boys              1
brave            46
braveness         1
bravery           8
Brazilian         1
brother           1
buttons           2

cadet             4
camp              2
cannon            2
cap               1
captain           8
cavalry           3
citizen          14
civilian          3
clothes           1
colonel           1
command           6
commanding        1
commander         3
costume           1
country           4
courage           5

danger            1
defender          2
defense           1
discipline        2
disliked          1

double            1
drill             2
drums             1
duty              4

enemy             1
England           1
English           1
erect             3

fellow            1
fight            17
fights            1
fighter          12
fighting         12
firearm           1
fort              2
fortune           1

general           4
Germany           1
glory             1
good              3
Grant             1
guard             8
guardian          1
guardsman         1
gun              27
guns              2

helmet            1
hero              8
him               1
hobo              1
home              1
hurt              1

infantry          2

jacky             1
Jim               1

king              1

lieutenant        5

male              3
man             189
men               4
manly             1
march            12
marching          5
marine            1
marshal           2
mechanic          2
military         17
militia           3
murder            1
music             1
musket            2

N.                1
nation            1
national          1
navy              2
necessary         1
nobility          1

obedience         1
obey              1
officer          12
officers          1
order             1
orderly           2

patriot           5
patriotic         1
patriotism        1
person            3
Philippines       1
police            1
policeman         6
protection        1
protector         2
proud             1

red               4
redcoat           1
regiment          1
regular           2
respectable       1
Richmond          1
rifle             3

sailor           58
sailors           1
salute            1
sentry            1
servant           1
service           1
show              1
sick              1
single            1
smart             1
sorrow            1
stateliness       1
store             1
straight          3
strength          1
stremious         1
strict            1
strong            4
sword             2

tall              2
tent              1
tin               4
training          1
travel            1
troop             1
troops            1

uniform          39
United States     1
upright           3
uprightness       1

valiant           1
veteran           3
volunteer         3

war              94
warfare           1
warrior          12
West Point        8
widow             2
work              2


47. CABBAGE

away              1

bad               1
beans             2
beef             11
beet              1
beets             2
boiled            1
broth             1
bud               1
bunchy            1

carrot            2
carrots           1
catsup            1
cauliflower      17
cigar             1
cold-slaw         1
cook              1
cooking           4
corn              1
cucumbers         1
cut               1

decayed           1
disagreeable      1
dish              2
dislike           1
dinner            4

eat              30
eating            6
eatable           6
eatables          3

farm             11
farming           1
field             3
fields            2
fine              1
flower            4
fond             22
fruit             7

garden           43
German            1
Germans           1
goat              1
good             13
green            44
greens            2
ground            3
grow              1
grows             1
growing           2
growth            1

ham               1
hard              3
head             30
heads             1
healthy           1
heavy             2
herb              1
home              1
horrid            2

indigestion       8

kale              1
kraut             2

large             3
leaf              2
leaves           11
letters          11
lot               1

meal              2
meat              8
Mrs. Wiggs        2
mustard           1

nice              1
nothing           1

odor              2
onion             2
onions            3

paper             1
parsley           1
patch            16
plant            48
plants            3
plantation        1
planted           1
planting          1
plate             1
pork              5
potato            5
potatoes         18
purple            1

quart             1

rabbit            2
red               3
rose              2
round             4

salad             5
sauerkraut       17
slaw              2
smell            11
soapy             1
solid             2
soup              2
sour              4
spice             1
spinach           1
sprouts           1
stalk             3
stew              1
stinking          1
strong            1
sustenance        1
sweet             3

taste             3
tender            1
tomato            2
tomatoes          2
turnip           20
turnips           6

unnecessary       1
unwholesome       1

Valhalla          1
vegetable       294
vegetables       10
vinegar           4
Virginia          1

white             1


48. HARD

adamant           2
apple             3
apples            1

bad               2
ball              5
baseball          1
bed               1
bench             1
blackboard        1
board             6
boards            2
bone              1
bread             1
break             1
brick            12
brittle           2
bullet            2

cabbage           2
callous           1
candy             2
can't             1
chair             3
character         1
coal              7
coarse            1
cold              1
crystallized      1

dense             1
diamond           3
difficult         5
disagreeable      1
do                1
durability        1

earth             1
earthen           1
easy             17
egg               7
eggs              1
examination       2

fare              1
farmer            1
faery             1
feeling           4
firm             11
firmness          7
fist              1
flint             1
floor            10
formidable        1
fruit             1

glass             2
glittering        1
gold              1
good              2
granite           1
ground            2

hammer            1
harsh             2
heart             2
hearted           2
heavy             2
hickory           1
hurt              1

ice               8
immovable         1
impenetrable      1
indestructible    1
individual        1
indurated         1
inflexible        1
injustice         1
icksome           1
iron             44

kind              1

labor             1
lead              2
lesson            2
lignum-vitae      1
life              2
low               1

hick              3

maple             1
marble            3
mathematics       1
mean              2
medium            2
metal             5
murder            1
mush              1

nail              1
nails             1
natural           1
nut               1
nuts              1

oak               1
opaque            1

pavement          2
perplexing        1
physics           1
piano             1
principle         1
pulpy             1

quality           1
questions         1

raining           1
resistance        4
resistant         1
rigid             1
road              1
rock             38
rocks             4
rocky             1
rough            11

saltpetre         1
severe            1
sidewalk          1
smooth           15
soft            367
solid            15
stale             1
steel            14
stick             1
stingy            1
stone           102
stones            1
stony             1
stove             2
strength          1
strong            4
stuff             1
substance         6

table             5
tack              1
thick             1
tight             1
touch             2
tough            12
tree              2
trouble           1
turnip            1

unbreakable       5
uncomfortable     5
uneasy            1
unimpressionable  1
unpleasant        2
unpliable         1
unripe            1
unyielding        1
uselessness       1

very              1

walnuts           1
water             2
wisdom            1
wood             66
work             19
working           2


49. EAGLE

air               3
altitude          1
America           7
American         12
animal            4
aspiring          1

bald              1
beak              8
beast             2
bill              2
bird            568
birds             6
birdie            1
black             1
butterfly         1
buzzard           2

carnivorous       1
carrion           1
chickens          1
claws             2
clouds            1
contour           1
crag              1
crow              3
cruelty           1

dollar            4
dove              5

eggs              1
emblem            8
eye              12
eyed              1
eyry              1

falcon            1
feathers          7
fierce            1
flag              2
flies             6
flight           22
flint             1
fly              46
flying           23
flyer             2
fowl              3
freedom           3

glare             1
glorious          1
golden            2
graceful          1
gray              1
great             1


hawk             18
height            1
high             21

insect            1
insignium         1

keen              1
king              4

large             9
lark              1
liberty           1
lofty             2

might             2
mountain         14
mountains         8

nest             12

owl               4

paper             3
parrot            1
partridge         1
peacock           1
pigeon            2
power             2
prey              5

quail             1
quarry            1

robin             1
rock              1

scarce            1
sharp             3
sight             1
sky               2
sly               2
soar              5
soars             3
soaring          14
solitude          1
space             1
sparrow           6
sport             1
spread            1
strength         11
strong            3
sun               1
swallow           3
swan              1
swift             4
swiftness         1
sword             1

talon             1
talons            1
tern              1
Times             1
turkey            1

United States     2

vulture           3

wing              8
wings            16

young             1

Zoo               2


50. STOMACH

abdomen          32
ache             31
anatomy          21
animal            2
appetite          5
apples            1
arm               2

back              1
bad               1
bag               7
basket            1
beast             2
beef              1
belly             6
belt              1
biology           1

body             99
bowels           18
brain             1
bread             1
breast            1

cancer            3
care              1
careful           2
cat               1
cavity            1
chart             1
chest            18
coil              1
condition         2
contain           1

delicate          1
diaphragm         1
digest            6
digesting         1
digestion        50
digestive         3
digests           2
dinner            7
disease           1

distress          1
doctor            2
dress             1
duodenum          1
dyspepsia         4

eat              45
eating           27
empty             8
engine            1
excellent         1

face              1
fat               1
feed              1
feeding           1
feet              1
food            102
foot              2
flesh             1
frame             1
front             1
full              7
function          1

gastric           5
Gertrude          1
good              4
grind             1
grinding          2

hand              2
hands             1
head              9
health            5
heart            24
hog               1
hunger            6
hungry            6
hurt              2
hurts             1
hygiene           1

illness           1
indigestion      17
inside            5
interior          2
internal          2
intestine        28
intestines       32

juice             1

large             4
leg               1
limb              1
liver            13
living            1
lung              1
lungs             3

machinery         1
man               5
meal              1
meals             1
member            5
milk              1
mortal            1
mouth             3
muscle            1

nausea            2
necessary         3
necessity         1
neck              1
nuisance          1

object            1
oblong            1
oesophagus        4
organ            81
organs            3
overeating        1
overloaded        1

pain             28
part              3
person            9
physiology        3
picture           1
poor              2
portion           1
pouch             4
psychology        1
pump              3
punch             2

receiver          1
receptacle        3
reservoir         2
rest              1
round             3

self              1
sick             10
sickness          7
skin              1
small             2
soft              4
sore              1
sour              2
specimen          1
strong            1
suffer            1
suffering         1
sustenance        1
system            2


tender            1
tenderness        1
thought           1
throat            1
tongue            2
trouble          25
troubles          1
troublesome       5
trunk             1
tube              3

upset             1
useful            1


vessel            2

want              1
water             1
weak              3
weakness          1
work              1


51. STEM

anything          1
appendage         1
apple            43
apples            1

base              1
beginning         3
blade             1
blossom           3
boat              1
body              1
brain             1
branch           33
branches          1
broad             1
broom             1
bud               4
bush              5
butt              1

cane              2
cherry            2
connection        3
connects          1
cord              2
core              2

end              10
ending            1
evolution         1

fibre             1
fibres            2
finger            1
flower          259
flowers           7
foundation        2
fruit            14

grass             1
green             9
growth            3

handle           20
hard              1
head              1
hold              2
holding           1
holder            4

holes             1

join              1

leaf             96
leaves            4
leg               1
length            3
lettuce           1
life              1
light             2
lily              1
limb              4
living            1
long             18

match             1

necessity         1

object            1
offshoot          1
organ             1

part              4
parts             1
particle          1
peach             2
pear              9
peduncle          1
pencil            3
petal             4
pick              1
piece             3
pipe             70
pit               1
plant            74
plow              1
point             6
poppy             1
projection        1
prop              1

reed              1
river             1
rod               1
root             27
roots             1
rose             21

shank             2
short             6
slender           7
small             1
smoke             1
soft              1
stalk            21
steps             2
stern             6
stick            14
stiff             1
stone             1
stop              1
storm             1
straight          2
support           8

thin              4
thorn             2
tide              2
tobacco           1
top               1
tree             44
trees             2
trunk             3
twig              7

valve             1
violet            1
vine              3

watch             7
water             2
weed              3
wind              3
winding           2
winder            3
wood              4


52. LAMP

Aladdin           1
arc               1
articles          6

black             5
blaze             1
brass             1
bright           12
brightness        3
burn             20
burning          10
burner            3
burns             1

candle           13
chandelier        2
cheer             1
chimney          37
convenience       1
crockery          1

dangers           1
dark              3
darkness          2
daylight          1
distance          1
dull              1

electric          5
evening           1

fire              5
flame             1
full              1
furniture         2

gas               4
glaring           1
glass             8
globe             7

high              3
home              1
hot               1
house             1

illumination      2

kerosene          7

lantern           1
large             2
library           1
light           650
lights            2
lighted           4
lighten           1
lit               2

match             1

nickle            1
night             4

oil              49
ornament          1

petroleum         1
post              5
pretty            1

reading           2
red               1
Rochester         1
room              2

see               2
shade            37
shadow            1
small             1
smoke             4
smokes            1
smoking           1
smoky             1
stand             2
stove             1
student           1

table             8
tall              1

useful            2

vessel            2

warmth            1
wick             23
wisdom            1


53. DREAM

absence           1
angel             1
angels            1
anger             1
anything          1
asleep            6
awake            11
awaking           1
awaken            1
awakening         3

baby              2
bad              16
beautiful         4
bed              11
bliss             3
book              1
boy               1

comfort           1
consciousness     2
conversation      1

dangerous         1
darkness          1
days              1
death             2
delusion          1
delusions         1
disagreeable      1
disappointment    1
discontent        1
disturbance       2
disturbing        1
doze              1
dread             1
dreary            2

easy              1
expectation       1
experiment        1
eyes              1

falling           2
fancy             9
fantasy           1
fear              1
feeling           1
feelings          1
forgotten         1
fortune           1
funny             1

girl              1
good              7
goodness          1
grand             1
grieving          1

hallucination     2
happiness         3
heaven            1
home              3
hope              1
horrible          3

idea              1
illusion          3
image             1
imaginary         2
imagination      12
imagine           5
imaginings        1
impression        2
indigestion       2
insanity          1
inspiration       1

kind              1

land              1
languid           2
lie               2
like              1
love              2

M.                1
man               2
mare              1
meditate          1
melancholy        1
melody            1
mesmeric          1
mind              8
money             1
music             1

nature            2
never             1
nice              3
night            42
nightmare        24
no                1
none              1
nonsense          2

object            1
omen              1
on                1
opium             1

paradise          1
patients          1
peace             1
peaceful          2
phantoms          1
picture           3
pillow            1
play              1
pleasant         38
pleasure         13
presentiment      1
prophesy          1
psychology        1
purple            1

queer             1
quiet             1

realization       1
recollection      1
relax             1
remember          1
repose            2
reposing          1
rest              3
restless          6
restlessness      1
reverie           2

sad               2
sadness           1
scene             1
second            1
semiconscious     1
sensation         1
sense             1
shade             1
shadows           1
short             1
sickness          2
sight             1
sights            1
sleep           339
sleeping         39
sleeper           2
sleeplessness     2
sleepy            2
slept             1
slumber          20
something         1
somnambulist      1
snore             2
soliloquy         1
stale             1
startling         1
story             1
sweet            14

talk              1
terrible          1
things            3
think            29
thinking          8
thought          38
thoughts         22
tiring            1
trouble           1
true              2

uncomfortable     1
unconscious       1
unconsciousness   1
uneasiness        1
uneasy            2
unfortunate       1
unpleasant        5
unpleasantness    1
unreal            2
unrest            2
unstable          1

vacancy           1
vagueness         1
vision           48
visions           6
vivid             1

wake              9
waking            1
wander            1
wandering         4
weird             1
wonder            2
woods             1
work              1


54. YELLOW

alive             1
amber             2
apple             3
autumn            1

banana            5
beautiful         3
beauty            2
becoming          1
bird              8
black            24
blossoms          1
blue             41
bright           23
brightness        2
brilliant         1
brown            13
buff              1
butter            7
buttercup        11
buttercups        2
butterfly         8

canary            4
cat               1
China             2
Chinaman          3
Chinee            3
Chinese           2
chrome            1
chrysanthemum     1
chrysanthemums    1
cloth             3
coarse            1
color           301
coloring          1
common            1
complexity        1
corn              1
cream             2
crocus            1

daffodil          3
daffodils         3
daisy             6
dandelion         7

dark              6
delightful        1
desert            1
disagreeable      1
dog               1
door              1
dream             1
dress             9
dresses           1
dull              1

ecru              1
egg               1

fade              1
fancy             1
fence             1
fever             3
flag              4
flame             1
flower           38
flowers           9
fruit             3

G.                1
garments          1
gay               1
glare             1
gold             13
golden            5
goldenglow        1
goldenrod         5
goods             1
gorgeous          1
grass             1
green            41

hair              2
house             2
hue               1

ink               1

jasmine           2
jaundice          3
jealousy          6
jonquil           1
journal           2

kid               2

leaf              2
leaves            1
lemon             7
light            14
lily              2

maize             1
man               1
marigolds         1
matter            1
mellow            1
melon             1
molasses          1

nature            1
nice              1

obnoxious         1
ochre             1
orange           47

paint             5
pale              2
pansy             3
paper             4
peach             2
pears             1
pillow            1
pink             13
plague            1
poppy             1
pretty            4
primrose          1
pumpkin           2
pumpkins          1
pure              1
purple            5

red              34
ribbon            1
rose              9

satin             1
school            1
sear              1
shade             4
silk              1
sky               2
soft              2
suit              1
sulphur           1
sun              21
sunflower         8
sunlight          7
sunshine          1

table             1
tan               2
tarnish           1
tree              1

ugly              1
unharmonious      1

violet            2

wagon             1
warm              1
warmth            1
wax               1
wheat             1
white            70


55. BREAD

appetite          1

bake              2
baking            4
baker             3
bakery            1
biscuit          14
biscuits          2
blue              4
board             1
box               1
breakfast         2
brown             3
buns              1
butter          151

cake             15
cheese            1
children          1
color             1
common            1
cookies           1
corn              1
crackers          1
crumbs            1
crust             6
cut               1

daily             3
diet              4
dinner            6
dish              1
dough            26
doughnuts         1

earn              1
eat             148
eating           44
eatable          28
eatables          6
edible            1

feed              1
flour            88
food            191
fresh             3
fruit             2

good             21
graham            2
grain             2

ham               1
hand              1
hard              3
heavy             2
holes             1
home              2
hot               1
hunger            7
hungry            4

knife             8

life             23
light             8
living            1
loaf              7
lunch             1

making            1
man               2
meal              1
meat              5
milk              1
mixing            1

necessary         1
necessity         2
needful           1
nourishment       4

oatmeal           1

pantry            1
pastry            1
plate             1
pudding           1

roll              1
rolls             2
rye               6

salt              1
salty             1
satisfaction      1
sister            1
soft              8
sour              1
staff             8
stale             3
strengthen        1
substance         2
substantial       1
sugar             1
sustenance        1
sweet             4

table             3
tea               2
toast             1
tough             1

useful            1

water             9
wheat            21
white            15
wholesome         1
wine              1
winner            1

yeast             8


56. JUSTICE

action            2
administered      2
administration    1
all               2
always            1
ask               1
authority         1

B.                1
bad               1
bed               1
blind             3
blindfolded       1
body              1

caught            1
charity           1
chastise          1
chief             1
clearness         1
comfort           1
command           3
commanding        1
conqueror         1
constable         1
court            64
courts            2
Creator           1
crime             1
criminal          1
cruelty           2

dealing           1
deeds             1
defying           1
delayed           1
demand            1
deserved          1
dispute           2
distribution      1
do                3
doing             2
done              1
Dr. E.            1
duty              5

elusive           1
emblem            1
employer          1
energy            1
equal             8
equality          9
equally           1
equity            3
even              2
exactness         1
execution         1

fair             32
fairness         21
favor             1
fear              1
fine              1
freedom           6
friendship        1

gift              1
give              1
given             3
God               8
godliness         1
good             14
goodness          2
govern            1
government        3
guilty            1

happy             1
harm              1
hasty             1
have              1
heaven            1
help              1
him               1
honest            5
honesty           3
honor             7

impartial         1
iniquity          1
injury            1
injustice        26
innocent          1

J.                1
jail              2
joy               1
judge            91
judged            1
judgment          6
jury              2
just              5
justified         4

kindness          6

lacking           1
large             1
law              74
lawful            2
lawyer            4
lenient           2
liberty          11
lots              1
love              1

magistrate        2
man              13
merciful          1
mercy            23
merit             1
mind              1
moral             1
mother            1

never             1
nobility          1
noble             1
none              1
nonsense          1

obey              1
obtain            1
oppression        1
order             4

pardon            1
partiality        4
peace           143
perfect           1
person            1
picture           1
Plato             1
police            1
policeman         1
politics          1
popular           1
power             1
privilege         1
purity            1

reason            1
reward            3
right           157
righteous         3
righteousness    13
rightly           1
rightness         1
rights           11
ruler             1

satisfaction      4
satisfied         1
satisfying        1
scales            5
severe            2
severity          1
sorrow            1
square            3
squareness        1
squire            1
statue            4
story             1
supreme           3
sure              2

tranquility       1
true              6
truth            14
truthfulness      2

unbias            1
unfairness        1
unhappiness       1
unjust            8
uprightness       1

vengeance         1
virtue            3

well              2
wicked            1
willingness       1
wisdom            2
wise              1
work              2
wrong             8

yes               1
yield             1


57. BOY

action            2
active            2
activity          2
agility           1
animal            3
athletic          3
athletics         2

baby              6
bad               9
ball             10
barefoot          1
baseball          5
beautiful         1
being             6
Ben               1
body              2
boisterous        1
book              1
bright            2
brother           6
busy              2

cap               1
careless          1
Charles           1
chicken           1
child            86
children          1
class             1
clothes           1
clothing          1
companion         2
cousin            1
curls             1

dead              1
development       1
dirty             2
dog               1

Edward            1
eighteen          1
embryonic         1
errand            1


fair              1
female            3
fight             1
flesh             1
foolish           1
football          1
Frank             1
friend            4
frolic            2
fun               4
funny             1

games             1

girl            319
good              7
grown             1
growth            1
gun               2

handsome          1
Harry             1
hat               1
head              1
hearty            1
hero              1
hood              2
hoop              2
human             9
humanity          1

imbecile          1
imperfect         1
incorrigible      1
industrious       1
infant            2
inhabitant        1
innocent          1

jacket            1
James             2
Jimmy             1
Joe               1
joyful            1
jump              1
jumper            1
juvenile          2

kid               4

lad               7
large             2
laugh             1
legs              1
life              2
little            3
lively            3

maid              1
male             63
man             104
manhood           1
mankind           1
manliness         1
manly             1
marbles           1
masculine         3
master            2
meanness          1
Michael           1
mischief         11
mischievous       7
mother            1
muscles           1
myself            1

naughty           1
Ned               2
nephew            1
newspaper         1
nice              3
noise             7
noisy             3
nuisance          1

obedient          1
out               1

pants             6
Paul              1
person           11
play             20
plays             1
playful           1
playfulness       1
pupil             2

rough             6
running           1
runs              1

scallywag         1
scamp             2
scholar           1
school           11
sex               4
sharp             1
shoes             2
small            14
smart             2
smiles            1
son               3
spirit            1
spoiled           1
sport             2
street            1
strength          2
strong            3
suit              2
sweetheart        1
swimming          1

tall              3
terror            1
think             1
Thomas            1
top               2
toys              1
Tracy             1
trait             1
tramp             1
trouble           1

useless           1

water             1
whistle           1
whistles          1
wicked            1
wild              2
wildness          1
woman             2
woods             1
work              1
working           1

young            22
youngster         1
youth            33
youthful          1


58. LIGHT

agreeable         1
air               8
airy              1
arc               1
assistance        1
awake             1

beacon            1
beautiful         2
beautifying       1
beauty            1
biscuit           1
black             3
blue              2
bread             1
bright           47
brightness       21
brilliant         3
brown             1
burn              2
burning           1

candle            8
cheer             1
clear             2
clearness         2
coat              2
color            19
comfort           2
complexion        1
convenient        1
cork              1

dark            231
darkness         93
dawn              2
day              81
daylight          2
daytime           6
dimness           1
distance          1
dress             1
dull              1

early             2
easy              1
education         1
electric          7
electricity       8
element           1
emptiness         1
enjoy             1
evening           1
eyes              1

fair              1
feather           6
feathers          1
fire              6
flame             1
fleshy            1
forward           1
fuel              1

gas              21
glare             1
gleam             1
good              8

hair              2
happiness         4
health            1
healthy           1
hearted           1
heat              8
heaven            1
heavy             5
hills             1

Illuminate        1
illumination      7

joy               1

kerosene          1
knowledge         1

laboratory        1
lamp             82
lamps             1
life              7
long              1
look              1
luminous          1

match             1
moon             10
morning           7

nice              1
night             3
necessity         1

paper             1
pathway           1
peaceful          1
pink              1
pipe              1
placid            1
pleasant          8
pleasure          1
plenty            1

rays              2
red               1
reflection        1
right             1
room              3

see              24
seeing            3
seen              1
shade             8
shadow            2
shadows           1
shine             2
shines            9
shining           2
sight             3
sign              1
sky               8
soft              1
sound             1
space             1
splendor          1
steam             1
sun              85
sunlight          1
sunshine         11
swift             1

transparent       1
truth             1
twilight          1

ventilation       1
Vera              1
vibration         1
vision            2
vivid             1

waist             1
warmth            2
waves             1
weak              1
weight            2
white             8
whiteness         2
window           15
world             1

yellow            6


59. HEALTH

action            1
activity          2
air               9
athletics         1

bad               5
baseball          1
beautiful         1
beauty           10
better            1
blessing          4
blood             1
board             1
body              9
boon              1
boy               2
broad             1
buoyancy          2

care              1
careful           1
cheer             1
circulation       1
cleanliness       1
climate           1
color             1
comfort          26
condition         6
constitution      1
consumption       1
contentment       1
convenience       1
country           2

desirable         3
disease           9
doctor            4

eating            1
enjoyment         5
everything        2
excellent         1
excursion         1
exercise          3
existence         1

face              1
feel              2
feeling          12
fine              1
food              4
form              1
fortune           2
freedom           1
fun               1

gift              3
girl              1
gladness          2
glow              1
golf              1
good             94
goodness          1
grand             2
gymnasium         1
gymnastics        1

happiness       111
happy             7
haste             1
healing           1
healthful         1
healthy           1
heaven            1
holiness          2
hygiene           2

ill               3
illness          13

joy               6

life              5
light             1
live              1
living            3
luck              2
luxury            1

man               4
me                1
medicine          3
merriment         1
mother            1
mountain          1
moving            1

necessary         1
needed            1
needful           1
normal            4

optimism          1

pain              1
perfect           8
person            6
physical          3
physician         1
physiology        1
play              1
pleasant          2
pleasure         14
plenty            1
poor              2
preserve          1
proper            1
prosperity        4

quick             1

red               1
riches            3
robust            9
rose              1
rosy              1
round             1
rugged            2

self              1
sick              9
sickly            2
sickness        153
smiles            1
sound             5
spirit            1
spirits           1
state             1
strength        112
strengths         1
strong           31
sturdy            1
success           1

temper            1
thankful          2
trouble           1

unhealthiness     1
unhealthy         3
useful            2

valuable          1
vigor            11
virility          1

walking           1
want              2
warm              1
water             1
weakness          1
wealth           76
well             63
wholesome         1
woman             1
wonderful         1

youth             1


60. BIBLE

academy           1
all               1
ancient           1

beauty            1
belief            1
beneficial        1
black             2
book            388
books             1

catechism         1
Christ            8
Christian         3
church           50
class             3
clean             1
clergyman         1
comfort           2
command           2
commandment       1
commandments      2
creed             1

devotion          1
directions        1
drama             1
duty              2

encyclopedia      1
excellent         1

fable             1
faith             1
family            2

Genesis           1
glass             1
God              48
good             28
goodness         12
gospel            3
gospels           1
grand             1
guide             1

heaven            2
heavy             1
help              1
history          26
holiness          5
holy             57
home              2
hope              1
hymns             2

instructive       1

Jacob             1
Jesus             4

knowledge         2
Koran             1

large             4
law               3
leaf              1
leaves            1
lectern           1
legend            1
lie               2
life              3
light             2
literature        2
Lord              5
love              2

message           1
mine              1
minister          3
Moses             2
mother            1

necessary         1
noble             1

obey              2
open              1

paper             1
piety             1
pious             2
pray              3
praying           2
prayer           19
prayers           7
prayer-book      13
preacher          2
preaching         1
prophet           1
psalms            4

rarely            1
read             31
reading          19
reformation       1
religion         89
religious         4
reverence         1
righteous         1
rot               3

sacred            3
Saviour           2
school            2
scripture        17
scriptures        3
sermon            1
shelf             1
sour              1
stones            1
stories           2
story             4
strength          1
studies           2
study             6
Sunday            6

table             3
teach             1
teacher           1
teachings         1
Testament        24
text              4
tradition         1
true              2
truth            17
truthfulness      1

unnecessary       1
useful            2

verses            1

weariness         1
word              8
words             1
worship           2
writ              1


61. MEMORY

absent            2
acquire           1
aid               1
analysis          1
ancient           1
association       2
attention         1
aunt              1

back              1
bad              19
beautiful         1
bird              1
blank             3
book              2
books             3
brain            46
brains            5
brightness        1
bucket            1

catechism         1
cause             1
charming          1

childhood         4
clear             1
concentration     2
connection        1
conscience        1
consciousness     2

dancing           1
death             1
debts             1
defect            2
defective         1
desirable         1
deterioration     1
dictionary        1
dim               1
distant           1
dream             1
dreams            3
dull              1

easy              1
educated          1
effort            1
elusive           1
English           1
Europe            1
events            2
everything        1
excellent         2
experiment        1

faces             1
faculty           1
failing           1
fails             1
fair              4
fancy             1
far               1
farther           1
fascination       1
faulty            1
feeling           1
fine              1
fleeting          1
fond              1
fool              1
forget           25
forgetful         5
forgetfulness    37
forgetting        5
forgotten         3
forty             1
friends           1

gone              2
good             68
gravestone        1
great             1
green             2

happiness         1
happy             1
head              9
hearing           1
history           2
home              2
hopefulness       1

idea              2
image             1
imagination       2
impossible        1
increase          1

intellect         7
intelligence      5
interpret         1
invisible         1

joy               1

keep              1
know              1
knowledge         4

lack              2
lacking           2
language          1
lasting           1
learn             1
learning          2
lecture           1
length            1
lessons           2
light             1
long              3
loss              1
love              1

magnificent       1
man               3
marvelous         1
me                1
memorandum        1
memorizing        1
mental            4
mind            138
mindful           1
mnemonics         2
mother            1
mud               1
my                1
myself            1

names             1
necessary         3
necessity         1
needful           1
noble             1
none              1

oblivion          1

painful           1
past              8
patient           1
pen               1
perception        2
person            2
picture           2
pictures          1
pleasantness      1
pleasure          2
poem              3
poems             1
poetry            7
poor             23
power             1
psychology        1

quick             1

reading           1
reason            1
recall            4
recalling         2
recognition       3
recollect         2
recollection     16
recollections     3
reflect           1
remember         27
remembering       4
remembrance      18
remind            2
reminder          1
reminiscence      2
reminiscences     1
reproductive      1
result            1
retain            1
retaining         2
retention         5
retentive         3
retrospect        1

sadness           1
scenes            1
scholar           1
school            6
sensation         1
sense             5
senses            2
short             7
simple            1
song              1
sound             2
splendid          1
stanza            1
storehouse        1
story             1
strengthen        1
strong            1
student           1
study             4
studying          1
sure              1
sweet             7
swift             1
swing             1

teacher           1
tender            1
test              5
thankful          1
things            1
think            58
thinking         38
thinks            1
thought          81
thoughts         28
thoughtful        8
thoughtfulness    3
thoughtlessness   1
time              1
train             1
training          1
tree              1

unconsciousness   1
understand        3
understanding     6
unstable          1
useful            2

verses            2

weak              1
well              1
will              1
wit               1
wonderful         1
work              2

youth             2


62. SHEEP

animal          225
animals          18
astray            1
awkward           1

baa               1
beast             3
bed               1
Bethlehem         1
black             5
blind             1
buffalo           1

calf              1
calm              1
cattle           47
cloth             1
country           3
cow              22
cows              5

death             1
deer              2
dirty             2
dog               6
dogs              2
eat               1

farm              4
feed              1
field            12
fields            6
fleece            3
flesh             1
flock            24
flocks            1
fold              4
follow            1
food              2
foolish           1
fowl              1
fur               1

gentle            1
gentleness        1
goad              1
goat             17
goats            10
good              2
grass             4
graze             1
grazing           5
group             1

hair              1
harmless          1
herd              4
herder            1
hill              1
hillside          2
horn              1
horse             1
humanity          1

innocence         5
innocent          2

jump              1

lamb            151
lambs            36
landscape         1
large             2
lecture           1
lowing            1

many              1
meadows           3
meat              5
meekness          1
mountain          3
mutton           60

nature            1

oxen              1

park              2
pasture          27
pastures          3
peace             1
peaceful          1
pet               1
picture           1
pig               2
plains            1
play              1
pretty            4

quadruped         2

raising           1
ram               1
rocks             1
run               1
running           1

shear             1
shearing          1
shears            1
shepherd         15
simple            1
sleep             1
small             2
soft              1
spring            1
stock             2
stupidity         1

tick              1
trust             1

wander            1
water             1
white            18
wolf              2
wool            143
woolly           10


63. BATH

baby              1
basin             1
bathe             2
bathing           6
beneficial        1
boat              1
boy               1

clean           120
cleaning          1
cleanliness     109
cleanly           2
cleanness         9
cleanse           6
cleansing         8
cold             14
comfort           3
cool              3
Creal Springs     1

delight           1
dirt              4
dirty             5
dry               1

English           1
every             1

filth             1
filthiness        1
fine              1
flowers           1
fluid             1
fresh             2

good              7

health            9
healthful         1
healthiness       1
healthy           4
hot              10
house             4

invigorates       1
invigorating      2

joy               1

large             1
luxury            1

man               1
massage           1
morning           2

nakedness         1
neatness          1
necessary         5
nice              2
none              1

ocean             6
often             1
once              1

pleasant          3
pleasure          2
plenty            2
plunge            3
porcelain         1

refreshed         1
refreshing        6
refreshment       1
river             2
robe              3
room              6

salt              1
sanitary          1
scrub             1
sensation         1
shower            3
sleeping          1
soap             13
soothing          1
sponge            1
spray             4
springs           1
swim             10
swimming          5

take              1
taken             1
toilet            2
towel             6
towels            2
tub              71

vapor             1
vessel            1

want              1
warm              3
wash            102
washing          16
water           339
wet               5
wood              1

yesterday         2


64. COTTAGE

abode             2
agreeable         1
alone             1
apartments        1

barn              2
beach             1
beautiful         1
box               1
brick             3
brook             1
brown             2
building         31
bungalow         13

cabin             3
camp              1
camping           2
Cape Cod          1
castle            2
chair             1
cheese            1
city              3
comfort          15
contentment       2
cottage           1
country          36
couple            2
cozy              2
cute              1

distant           1
door              2
dwelling         23

family            2
far               1
farm              4
fence             1
field             6
fine              2
flowers           4
frame             2

garden            7
green             3

habitable         1
habitation        3
hamlet            1
hammock           1
handsome          1
happiness         5
happy             1
hill              3
home             85
homelike          1
homestead         1
hope              1
hospital          1
house           461
houses            1

innocence         1
ivy               1

lake              5
lane              1
large             1
lawn              4
little            4
live             17
living            5
log               1
lonesomeness      1
love              4
low               2
lumber            1

Maine             1
mansion          15

name              1
neat              3
Newburgh          1
nice              4

one               2
open              1
orchard           1
outing            1

painted           1
palace            2
personage         2
patient           1
patients          1
peace             1
people            1
picturesque       1
place             1
pleasantness      1
pleasure          1
pond              1
porch             4
prettiness        1
pretty            3
pudding           1

reside            1
residence         4
resident          1
resort            1
rest              3
river             1
rod               1
roof              3
roomy             1
roses             2
rustic            1

school            1
sea              10
seashore          5
seaside           2
shelter           6
shingles          2
shore             2
simplicity        1
sleep             1
small            30
snug              1
stands            1
structure         3
summer            9
sweet             1
Switzerland       1

table             1
tent              4
thatched          2
tower             1
trees             1
two               3

unity             1

vacation          2
veranda           1
villa             1
village           3
vine              1
vines             3

white             3
window            2
woman             1
wood             11
wooden            1
woods             3

yard              1


65. SWIFT

active            2
aeroplane         2
ahead             1
antelope          1
arrow            13
automobile       11
autos             1

ball              6
beauty            1
better            1
bicycle           1
bird             16
birds             1
boat              1
brisk             1
brook             1
bullet            3

cat               1
channel           1
child             1
choice            1
clever            1
creek             1
current           7
curve             1
cutting           1

deer              7
degree            1
doctor            1
dog               1

eagle             8
easy              2
engine            3

fast            222
fastness          1
fear              1
fish              1
feet              5
flight            6
fly               3
flying            3
foot              1

girl              1
go                1
going             1
good              1
grand             1
Greek             1

heard             1
hare              1
haste             1
hear              1
high              1
horse            28
hurry            12
hurrying          1

Indian            1

kite              1

launch            1
lazy              1
light             2
lightening        4
lively            3

man               1
Marathon          1
Mercury           1
messenger         1
meteor            1
more              1
morning           1
motion            2
motoring          1
movement          2
moving            1
muscles           1

near              1
Niagara Falls     1

power             1

quick           117
quickly          13
quickness         5
quiet             1

race              6
rapid            27
rapidity          2
rapidly           2
real              1
riding            1
river            18
rivers            1
road              1
rocket            1
run              19
running          20
runner           18
rushing           1

sail              1
sharp             1
shot              1
sleigh            1
slow            100
slowly            4
smart            16
smartness         1
smooth            3
speed            29
speedily          1
speeding          1
speedy            7
spinchiled        1
spy               2
steam             1
sting             1
stone             1
stream            8
strong            2
sure              2
swallow           5
swallows          1

throw             1
tide              2
time              1
train            18
trains            1

walking           1
water            11
wind              8
work              1


66. BLUE

air               1
azure             1

ball              1
beautiful         1
becoming          1
bell              1
binding           1
bird              5
black            38
blood             1
blossom           1
blotter           1
bluebird          1
bluing            2
blusey            1
book              1
bright            5
brown             8

cadet             1
chemical          1
clock             1
cloth             7
clothes           3
clothing          1
cloud             1
could             1
color           256
colors            2
coloring          2

dainty            1
dark             24
deep              5
depth             1
dress            18
dull              1

ether             1
eyes              6

fair              1
feeling           4
fidelity          1
flag              6
flower            3
forget-me-not     1

gentian           1
globe             1
gloominess        2
gloomy            2
glum              1
good              1
grass             2
gray             10
green            54

hat               1
heaven            5
heavens           2
heavenly          1
homesick          1
hopeful           1
horizon           1
house             1
hue               1

indigo            5
ink               6

lake              1
light             8
lily              1
lonesome          1

melancholy        2
Monday            1

navy              1
necktie           1

ocean            12

paint             8
pale              1
paper             1
pencil            1
pink              9
pleasant          2
pleasing          1
policeman         1
pretty            4
purity            1
purple            2

red              54
restful           1
ribbon            3
river             1
room              1

sad               2
sailor            1
sea               7
serge             1
shade             2
skies             1
sky             239
soft              1
somber            1
space             1
stripes           1
suit              1

tie               2
tint              1
true              7
truth             2
turquoise         1

unhappy           1
unrest            1

velvet            1
violet            2
violets           3

washing           2
water             8
white            47
wind              2

Yale              2
yellow           27


67. HUNGRY

aching            1
ambitious         1
angry             1
animal            2
appeasing         1
appetite         57
appetizing        2

baby              2
bad               3
bananas           1
bear              1
beggar            4
biscuit           1
boy               5
bread            26
breakfast         8
butcher           1

candy             1
child             5
children          5
cold              4
college           1
country           1
crackers          1
crave             1
craving           7
cupboard          1

dark              1
desirable         1
desire           11
devil             1
devour            1
dinner           31
disagreeable      1
discomfort        4
displeasure       1
dissatisfaction   1
dissatisfied      1
distress          1
dog              14
dogs              1
dry               1

eat             126
eating           64
eatables          2
emotion           1
emptiness         4
empty            13
exhausted         2

faint             9
fainting          1
famine            5
famish            1
famished         11
famishing         1
fascinating       1
fast              3
fasting           5
fatigue           4
fatigued          1
fed               4
feel              1
feeling           8
fill              1
filled            4
food            136
form              1
fulfilment        1
full              9
fruit             3

gaunt             1
Gertrude          1
girl              1
gnawing           2
good              1
grub              1

hardship          1
Henrietta         1
hog               1
horse             1
hunger            2

I                 3
ice-cream         1

kitchen           1

lack              2
lion              1
longing           5
lunch             4

man               5
me                4
meal              1
meat              3
milk              1
miserable         2
misery            1

nausea            1
necessary         1
need              2
needy             1
never             1
nice              1
no                1
noon              1
nothing           1
nourish           1
now               2

ocean             1
often             1

pain              5
painful           1
pallid            1
pang              1
peaches           1
perishing         1
person            2
picnic            2
pie               2
plenty            2
plow              1
poor              6
potatoes          1
poverty           2
present           1

ravenous          1
repletion         1

sad               1
sandwiches        2
satiated          3
satiety           2
satisfied        14
satisfy           2
school            1
sensation         1
sharp             1
ship              1
sick              1
sleepy            1
slow              1
sorrow            2
starvation       10
starve            8
starved          15
starving         29
steak             2
stomach          13
suffering         1
sufficiency       1
sufficient        1
supper            2

table             1
thirst           12
thirsty          61
thought           1
tiger             1
tired            12
tiresome          1
tramp             3
traveling         1

uncomfortable     1
unhappiness       1
unhappy           4
unpleasant        4
unsatisfied       3
very              1
viands            1
victuals          1

walk              1
want             25
wanting           5
weak              5
weakness          3
wish              2
wolf             10


68. PRIEST

altar             3
authority         1

belief            1
Bible             3
bishop            6
black            13
blessing          1
book              1
boy               1
brother           1

cassock           1
cathedral         2
Catholic         36
Catholics         2
Catholicism       4
ceremony          1
chancel           1
chapel            2
childhood         1
church          166
clean             1
clergy           30
clergyman        62
cleric            1
clerical          2
cloister          1
cloth             1
clothes           1
collar            1
comforter         1
command           1
communion         1
confession        5
confessor         2
conscientious     1
console           1
counsellor        1
crucifix          1

dignified         1
discipline        2
discontent        1
dishonor          1
dislike           1
divine            1
divinity          1
doctor            5
doing             1
dominie           1
dress             1
Dr. K.            1
duty              1

exalted           1

faithful          2
fakir             2
fakirs            1
fat               3
father           15
follower          1
forgive           1
forgiveness       1

garb              2
gentleman         1
God               2
good              9
goodness          1
gown              6

heaven            2
high              1
holiness          3
holy             15
honor             2
hood              2
house             1
humble            1
hypocrite         2

inspired          1
instruction       1

Jew               2
just              1
justice           1

kind              1
knowledge         1

layman            2
leader            4
lecture           1
Levi              1
Levite            2
Lord              1

male              5
man              75
mass              5
minister        178
monastery         5
monk              9
moral             1

noble             1
nun              12

office            1

parson           11
pastor           11
people            1
person            3
piety             1
pious             4
Pope              3
power             1
praise            1
pray              3
prays             1
prayer            8
prayers           1
preach            3
preaches          2
preacher         35
prelate           2
priestess         2
profession        1
prophet           3
pulpit            1
purity            2

rabbi             2
religion         57
religious         7
representative    1
repulsive         1
reserved          1
reverend          1
righteous         2
road              1
robe             12
robes             8
ruler             1

sacred            2
sacrifice         1
sanctity          1
school            1
sent              1
serious           1
sermon            3
sermony           1
servant           2
service           2
services          1
shaven            2
shoot             1
sinner            1
sister            1
slim              1
solemnity         1
sometimes         1
spookism          1
stern             1
student           1
Sunday            2
surplice          3

table             1
teacher           2


ugly              1

vest              1
vicar             1

York              1


169. OCEAN

afraid            1
angry             1
Atlantic         11

barge             1
bathing           3
bay               3
beach             5
beautiful         1
big               5
bigness           1
billows           1
blue             25
boat              6
boats             1
body              2
boisterous        1
breadth           3
breeze            1
broad             3
Bryon             1

Cape Cod          1
Coney Island      2
country           1
crossing          1
current           1

dark              1
deep             87
deepness          1
depth            10
depths            1
distance          2

enormous          1
Europe            1
expanse           2
expansive         1

float             1
foam              2

grand             2
grandeur          2
great             3
greatness         1
green             2
Grove             2
gulfs             1

Hudson            1

immense           1
immensity         2
infinity          2

joy               2

lake             12
land              8
large             9
launch            1
liquid            1

Maine             1
Mauretania        1
might             1
mighty            3
motion            2

power             1
pretty            1

quantity          1

river            36
roars             1
rough            12

sail              2
sailing           2
salt             10
sand              2
Sandy Hook        1
sea              75
seas              3
seashore          2
seething          1
shining           1
ship             24
ships            11
shore             2
sky               1
sound             1
storm             1
storms            1
steamboat         1
steamer          14
steamers          1
steamship         1
stream            4
swiftness         1
swim              2
swimming          1

tide              1
terrible          1
traveling         1
trip              1


valley            1
vast              7
vastness          9
vessel            2
voyage            1

waste             1
water           427
waters            1
wave             12
waves            45
wavy              1
wet               2
white             1
wide             15
wonder            1
wonderful         1


70. HEAD

above             1
ache              9
aches             1
anatomy           8
animal            2
appearance        1
arm               2
arms              3
asymmetrical      1

baby's            1
back              2
bald              1
ball              1
beautiful         1
beginning         1
big               5
black             1
body            146
bonehead          1
boss              1
brain            58
brains           32
branch            1
bright            1
brown             1

cabbage           7
captain           3
cattle            1
cavity            2
chess             2
chief             2
chop              1
clear             1
comb              2
combs             1
consciousness     1
cover             1
covered           1
cow               2
cranium          11
crown             1

director          1
donkey            1

ear               1
ears              1
emptiness         1
empty             1
encephalon        1
end               1
extremity         1
eye               2
eyes             10

face             13
father            1
feature           1
features          2
feet             26
figure            1
firm              1
first             2
food              1
foot             64
forehead          1
front             1

girl              1
glasses           1
good              3
govern            1
great             1

hair            159
hand             11
hands             2
handsome          1
hard              2
hat              17
headless          1
heart             8
heels             2
high              3
highest           2
hot               2
house             1
human             4

individual        1
intellect         2
intelligence      3

king              1
knee              1
knowledge        17

large            19
leadership        1
leading           1
life              1
light             2
limb              8
limbs             1
little            1
long              1
louse             1

man              14
man's             1
masterpiece       1
medium            1
member            7
memory            3
mentality         1
mind             14
mouth             1

nail              1
nation            1
neck             17
nose              2

organ             5

pain              1
part              6
people            1
person           15
physiology        2
planning          1
Pope              1
power             3
president         2
pretty            1
principal         2
procession        1

quarters          1

rest              2
round            21
roundness         1
ruler             3

scalp             4
sense             3
senses            1
sensible          1
shape             4
shaped            1
shoulder          1
shoulders        12
skull             5
small             7
sore              2
square            1
statue            2

stomach           2
strong            1
superintendent    2
symmetry          1

tail              3
teeth             1
thick             2
think             9
thinking          6
thought          16
thoughts          4
tired             1
top              31
trunk             2

useful            2

whirl             1
wit               1
woman             1
woman's           2
work              1


71. STOVE

article           3

bake              1
baking            1
black            59
blacking          4
box               1
breakfast         1
bright            2
burn             12
burning           2

chair             1
chimney           1
coal             25
comfort           2
cook             24
cooking          34
cooks             1
cover             3

dark              1
dinner            1
dirt              1
dishes            1

fire            217
fireplace         3
flame             1
food              3
Franklin          1
fry               1
fuel              1
furnace           6
furniture         8
furnitureness     1

gas               7
German            1
good              2
grate             1

hard              2
hardware          1
heat            213
heating           1
heats             1
heater            2
heavy             2
home              1
hot              86
house             2
household         1

icebox            1
implement         1
instrument        2
iron             51
isinglass         1

kettle            4
kitchen          11

lamp              3
large             2
legs              2
lid               4
lifter            3
light             1
long              1

metal             2

oil               1
oven              1

painful           1
pipe             18
pipes             1
poker             5
polish           10

radiator          2
range            19
receptacle        1
red               1
room              2
round             1
rusty             1

shovel            1
sink              1
small             2
smoke             1
steel             3
structure         1

teakettle         1

using             1
utensil           2

warm             32
warmth           42
water             1
winter            2
wood              7

zinc              1


72. LONG

age               1
anxiety           1
arm               1
arms              1
avenue            2
away              1

barn              1
beach             1
bench             1
big               1
blackboard        1
board             2
boat              6
book              1
boulevard         1
bridge            1
broad             2
Brooklyn Bridge   1
broomstick        1
building          1

cable             1
chimney           1
coat              1
courage           1
craving           1

day               9
days              1
deep              1
depth             1
desirable         1
dimensions        1
distance         81
distant           3
dress             6
duration          1

elongated         1
endless           1
enough            1
eternity          2
extended          1
extension         1
extensive         1
extent            1

far               8
feet              1
fellow            1
fence             2
flagpole          1
foot              1
for               1

giant             2
girl              1
glass             2
grass             4
great             1

hair              2
hall              2
head              1
height            1
high              5
hill              1
hose              1
hours             1
house             1

Island            2

journey           8

labor             1
lane              3
lanky             2
large             7
lasting           1
lecture           1
legs              1
length           50
lengthy           6
level             1
life              4
line              5
linear            1
live              1
Lusitania         1

man               5
measure           7
medium            2
meter             1
mile             13
miles             1
Mississippi       1
much              1

name              1
narrow           15
night             2
nose              1

oblong            1

path              2
person            1
pin               1
pipe              1
plant             1
plenty            1
pole             20

railroad          4
railway           1
rails             1
reed              1
ribbon            3
ride              1
river            15
road             32
rod               1
room              1
rope              7
row               1
rug               1
rule              2
ruler             4

shape             1
sharp             1
shore             1
short           413
shovel            1
slender           1
slim              1
slow              1
small             1
snake             2
something         1
space             1
spacious          1
spire             1
square            1
stay              1
steamer           1
steeple           1
stick             8
sticks            1
story             2
straight          1
street            6
streets           1
strength          1
stretch           2
string            6
stupid            1
summer            1

table             3
tall             26
test              1
thin              2
thread            2
throw             1
time             15
tiresome          1
tower             1
track             3
train             2
tree              4
trip              1

vast              1
very              1

wait              1
waiting           2
walk              7
walking           1
walls             1
way               6
ways              1
weary             1
whale             1
while             1
wide              7
winter            1
wire              1
wishing           1
without           1
worm              1

yard              4
year              2


73. RELIGION

Abraham           1
aesthetics        1
aim               1
all               1
anything          1
association       1
atheism           2
atheism           4

Baptist           2
beauty            1
belief           39
beliefs           1
believe           2
believing         1
believer          1
belong            1
belonging         1
Bible            52
body              1
books             2
brain             3
Buddha            1

catechism         1
Catholic         56
ceremony          2
China             1
Christ            8
Christian        14
Christianity      7
Christlike        1
church          161
churches          4
churchman         1
civilize          1
clergyman         1
comfort           4
commandments      1
conduct           1
Congregational    1
conscience        2
conversion        1
Creator           2
creed            33
custom            1

deep              1
denomination     11
devotion          4
different         2
difficult         1
dislike           1
divine            1
doctrine          4
dogma             1
doubt             2
Druids            1
duties            1
duty              2

emotion           1
Episcopal         4
Episcopalian      1
eternity          1
ethics            2
everyday          1

fair              1
faith            47
fake              1
fanaticism        1
feeling           1
fine              1
foolish           2
free              1

gentle            1
German            1
God              31
godly             1
good             46
goodness         10
gospel            2
government        1
guide             3

happiness         3
harmony           1
health            1
heathen           3
heaven            8
Hebrew            1
helpful           2
hereafter         1
heresy            1
history           2
holiness          4
holy             10
honor             1
house             1
hypocrisy         1

idea              2
ideas             1
ignorance         1
indefinite        1
indiscreet        1
institutions      1
irreligion        1
irreligious       1

Jesus             3
Jew               3
Jews              1
Jewish            4
just              1

kind              2
knowledge         1

law               1
learning          1
life              4
living            1
Lord              1
Lutheran          1

man               1
men               1
mankind           1
many              1
mental            1
Methodism         1
Methodist         7
minister         15
modesty           1
Mohammed          2
morals            2
mystic            1

nationality       2
need              1
no                1
none              5
nothing           2
nun               1
nuns              1

obey              1
opinion           3
order             1
orthodox          1

paganism          1
peace             3
people            3
perfect           1
persecution       1
person            2
persuasion        3
piety            13
pious            13
poor              2
Pope              1
powerful          1
practice          2
pray              2
praying           2
prayer           21
prayers           5
prayer-book       2
preacher          2
preaching         2
Presbyterian      3
priest           28
profession        3
professor         1
Protestant       30
pulpit            1
pure              2
puzzle            1

question          1

race              1
rector            1
religious         2
reverence         3
right             2
righteousness     2

sacrament         1
sacred            4
sacredness        1
saintly           1
saints            1
salvation         2
scholastic        1
science           2
scripture         1
sect              3
sectarian         2
self              1
service           3
sheeney           1
society           1
solace            1
somewhat          1
soul              1
spirituality      1
stability         1
standby           1
study             1
superstition      1

tabernacle        1
table             1
teaching          1
temperament       1
temple            2
think             2
thinking          1
thought          12
thoughtful        1
training          1
true              1
trust             1
truth             6

uncertain         1
uncertainty       1
unknowable        1

virtuous          1
vow               1

want              1
wickedness        1
wide              1
woman             1
wonder            1
wonderful         1
work              1
worship          14
worshipping       1

Yankee            1


74. WHISKEY

abomination       1
alcohol          50
ale               1
amber             1
appetizer         1
apple             1
awful             1

bad              35
barley            1
barrel            2
bed               1
beer             46
beverage          9
biting            1
bitter            5
booze            10
Boston            1
bottle           29
brandy           24
breath            1
burn              1
burning           4

Carrie Nation     1
cider             3
closet            1
color             1
corn              1
curse             4

dangerous         1
dark              1
death             1
degradation       1
despised          1

destruction       1
devil             1
deviltry          1
Dewar's           1
disagreeable      1
discontent        1
disgust           1
distillery        1

distress          1
dope              1
dreadful          1
drink           232
drinks            1
drinking         17
drinkable         1
drug              1
drunk            31
drunkard         18
drunkards         3
drunkenness      26

evil              2

fast              1
fire              4
flask             1
fluid             4
food              1
full              1

gin               8
glass             3
good             15
grain             1

hard              1
headache          1
Hennessey's       1
hops              1
horror            1
hot               2
hotels            1
Hunter            1

indulge           1
indulgence        1
inebriety         1
insanity          1
intemperance      5
intoxicant       13
intoxicants       2
intoxicated       3
intoxicating     14
intoxication     14

jag               1

Kentucky          1
knock             1

law               1
liquid           12
liquids           1
liquor           70

malt              2
men               2
medicine          4
misery            1
money             1
moonshine         1

narcotic          3
nice              3
none              1

odor              1
old               1

pint              1
place             1
pleasant          1
poison            4
poor              1
poorhouse         1
powerful          1
prohibition       2
punch             1

rarely            1
red               2
ruin              1
ruination         1
rum              23
rye               9

saloon           15
saloons           1
Scotch            1
seasickness       1
sick              2
sickness          2
smell             2
smuggle           1
sorrow            1
sour              4
spirit            5
spirits          23
stimulant        88
stimulants        4
stimulating       1
stimulation       1
stomach           1
straight          2
strong            6
stupidity         1
suffering         1

taste             1
temperance        4
temptation        1
terrible          1
thirst            1
thirsty           1
tipsy             1
toddy             1
toper             1
trouble           2

unhealthy         1
unpleasantness    1

warm              1
water             9
wine             16
wrong             1


75. Child

adult             5
angel             8

babe              7
baby            193
bad               1
beautiful         8
beauty            5
being             8
bird              2
birth             2
blessing          2
body              2

born              1
boy              64
boys              3
burden            1

care              1
carriage          1
charm             1
childhood         1
childish          1
Christ            1
clothes           1
comfort           8
coming            1
companion         1
cradle            2
creep             1
crib              1
cries             1
cry               4
cross             1
cunning           1
cute              8

darling           1
daughter          2
dear              1
dearest           1
delight           1
disobedient       1
dog               1
doll              4
dress             4
dresses           1

Eleanor           1
Elizabeth         1
embryonic         1
expectation       1

family            2
fat               1
father            5
female            3
frolicsome        1
fun               2
fussy             1
future            1

girl             45
girls             2
glass             1
good              7
goose             1
Greta             1
growing           1
growth            1

habits            1
hair              1
happiness         2
happy             2
healthy           1
helpless          1
helplessness      1
home              6
hood              2
hospital          1
human             5
humanity          1

ill               1
immature          1
infancy           1
infant          122
injury            1
innocence        16
innocent         11
interesting       1

joy               1
juvenile          2

kid               4
kindergarten      1

labor             2
lady              2
large             2
like              1
little           11
lonely            1
loveable          1
love              8
loving            2
lovely            4

male              1
mammal            1
man              41
maternity         1
me                1
mite              1
mother           55
motherhood        1

naive             1
naughty           1
necessary         1
nephew            1
nice              1
night-dress       1
noise             1
nuisance          2

obedient          1
offspring         6

parent            6
parents           1
people            3
person           18
pet               1
play             14
playing           3
playful           3
pleasure          4
plump             1
precious          1
pretty           10
pupil             1
purity            1

rattle            1
religious         1

school            5
screaming         1
senses            1
simple            1
simplicity        1
sister            1
small            52
smile             1
son               2
spoiled           1
study             1
sweet             6
sweetness         2

table             1
tender            1
three             1
toys              1
trouble           1

weak              3
woman            18

young            30
youngster         2
youth            29
youthful          1


76. BITTER

acid              8
acrid             1
agreeable         1
ale               1
almond            4
almonds           3
aloe              4
aloes             6
altogether        1
alum              2
anger             3
apples            3
apple             1
apricot           1
astringent        1

bad              10
banana            1
beer              5
berry             1
biting            1
boneset           1
burdock           1

candy             1
cascara           1
chastisement      1
chickory          1
chocolate         1
cider             1
cold              6
cross             1
cup               1

deep              1
disagreeable     10
disappointment    1
dislike           2
distasteful      10
dregs             1
drink             2

enemy             2

feelings          1
flag              1
fruit             4

gall             42
good              2
grape             1
grapefruit        3
grass             1
grief             2
grudge            1

hatred            2
herb              2
herbs             5
hops              1
horrid            3
horseradish       1

icy               1
ill               1
irritating        1

lemon             8
lemons            1
lemonade          1
lessons           1
life              1
lines             1
liquor            1
love              1

magen             1
man               1
mandrake          1
medicine         37
Mirabar           1
morphine          1

nasty             3
nice              1
none              1
nux               1

offensive         1
olives            1
orange            3

peach             1
peel              1
pepper            9
persimmon         2
pickle            3
pickles           1
pleasant          1
plums             4
poison            1
puckering         1

quassia           1
quince            1
quinine          23

rank              1

sadness           1
salt              2
salts             2
sharp             3
sorrow            8
sound             1
sour            222
sourness          2
spice             1
strong            3
strychnia         1
strychnine        4
suffering         1
sweet           305
sweeter           1

tart              8
taste            66
tasteless         3
tasting           1
tea               1
tears             1
temper            1
thoroughwort      3
thought           1
tonic             1
tonics            2
trouble           1
turnip            1

ugly              3
unhealthy         1
unpalatable       1
unpleasant       19
unpleasantness    1
unsweetened       1
unwholesome       1

vegetables        1
vinegar          17

water             1
weather           1
wine              1
word              1
words             2
wormwood          2
wrong             1


77. HAMMER

action            2
annoyance         1
anvil             6
article           1
awl               1
axe              11

bang              3
beating           1
blacksmith        2
blow              6
board             2
bruiser           1
building          2

carpenter        13
carpentering      1
chisel           10
claps             1
claw              1
club              2
concussion        1
convenience       1

drive            17
drives            1
driving           5
door              1

easy              1
effort            1

finger            3
force             2

geology           1

handle            5
hard             53
hatchet           6
head              2
heavy            13
hit              21
horseshoe         1
hurt              1
hurts             1

implement         8
instrument       38
iron             45

J.                2

knife             1
knock            35
knocker           6
knocking          5

large             2
lost              1

mallet            3
mark              1
maul              1
metal             1

nail            185
nails            98
nailing           2
noise            36
nut               1
nuts              1

one               2

pain              1
picture           2
picture           1
plumber           1
pound            51
pounding         12
pounds            1

rap               1
repairs           1
revolver          1
road              1
rod               1
round             1

saw               9
scissors          1
shoemaker         1
shop              1
sledge           10
small             2
sound             9
spade             1
stay              1
steel            20
stone             1
strength          1
strike           28
striking          4
stroke            1

tack              3
tacks            11
Thor              1
thread            1
throw             6
throwing          1
thumb             1
thump             1
toe               1
tongs            29
tool             69
tools             3
turf              1

use               1
useful            5
utensil           1

weapon            3
weight            3
wood              6
work              8
working           2


78. THIRSTY

all               1
always            2
animal            1
appetite          3

bar               1
beer              4
beverage          1
bird              1
boy               1
brooks            1

cattle            1
child             2
cold              1
craving           4
cream             1
cup               2

desert            2
desire            4
desiring          1
dipper            1
disagreeable      1
discomfort        2
dog               2
drink           206
drinking         23
drought           8
dry             218
dryness           5

emotion           1
empty             1
exhausted         1

famished          1
fatigue           1
feeling           5
fluid             1
food              1
fountain          1

glass             1
good              1

hard              1
haste             1
heat              2
horse             1
hot               2
hunger            9
hungry           41

labor             1
lack              2
lawn              1
lemonade          7
liquid            1
longing           4

man               1
mouth             2

nauseated         1

oranges           1

pain              2
parched           3
parching          2
people            1
person            1

quench           12
quenched          4

refreshing        1

satiated          1
satisfied         3
sensation         1
soda              2
spring            3
stream            1
suffering         1

terrible          1
throat            1
tongue            1

uncomfortable     1
unpleasant        2

very              1
vichy             1

walk              2
want              9
wanting           2
warm              1
water           341
wench             1
wet               3
work              2


79. CITY

Albany            1

beautiful         1
big               9
Boston            5
bridges           1
Brooklyn          3
building          6
buildings        20
bulk              1
Burlington        1
business          1
busy              4
bustle            2

capital           6
cars              3
charming          1
Chicago           4
child             1
citizen           7
civilization      1
Cleveland         1
collection        2
community         5
complexity        1
confusion         1
congregation      1
corporation       2
country          74
Creal             1
Creal Springs     1
crowd            11
crowded           7
crowds            1

density           1
dirt              1

distance          1

earth             1
excitement        1

fine              1
fun               1

gaiety            1
good              1
government        1
governor          1
great             2
greatness         1

habitation        3
heat              1
hill              2
home              5
homes             1
hot               1
house             3
houses           52

immense           1
incorporated      1
incorporation     1
industry          2
inhabitant        1
inhabitants      12
inhabited         1

joy               1

land              2
large            62
largeness         1
life              2
live              7
loathing          1
location          2
lots              1

machinery         1
majority          1
Manhattan         1
manufacture       2
many              3
men               2
metropolis        6
mill              1
mountain          1
municipal         1
municipality      1

nation            1
New York         99
noise            12
noisy             6

park              1
pavement          1
people           48
place            37
pleasantness      1
populated         2
population       19
populous          1
Poughkeepsie      6

republic          2
residence         2
resting           1
rich              1

scene             1
sea               1
settlement        1
shopping          1
shops             1
sights            1
sin               1
size              1
slums             1
small             1
smoke             1
space             2
Springfield       1
state            26
stores            1
street            3
streets          11

tale              1
ten thousand      1
theatre           2
theatres          1
towers            2
town            258
towns             1
township          1
traffic           1
traveling         1
tumult            1
turmoil           2

village          44

wagons            1
welcome           1
world             1


80. SQUARE

accurate          1
acre              1
across            1
active            1
airy              1
angle            11
angles            6
angular           4
arithmetic        1
association       1

bed               1
best              1
big               1
block            71
board             4
book              4
box              36
brick             2
broad             5
building          2
business          1

carpenter         9
carpet            1
cars              1
center            2
Chatham           1
checkers          1
circle           22
circular          1
city              4
Common            1
Commons           1
compass           5
concert           1
Copley            1
corner            7
corners          18
cornered          2
correct           1
correctness       1
cover             1
crackers          1
crooked           3
crowd             1
cube              9
cubic             1
cubical           1
curse             1
curve             1

deal              1
dealing           1
decoration        1
desk              2
Dewey             1
dice              4
die               1
door              2
Düsseldorf        1

earth             1
ease              1
equal             6
even             19
evenness          1
exact             1

fair              3
field             4
figure            4
file              1
flat              4
floor             1
foot              2
form              1
four             10
frame             1
furlong           1

garden            5
geometry         10
Getty             1
goods             1
grass             1
green             3
grounds           1

hand              1
handkerchief      2
Harlem            1
Herald            2
heavy             1
honest            3
honesty           1
house             5
houses            3

inch              2
inches            1
instrument        1
iron              1

just              1
justice           2
junction          1
kindergarten      1
knob              1

land              2
large             5
Lawrence          1
length            2
level            10
lines             2
little            1
long             18
lot               1

Madison          12
man               5
mark              1
marks             1
masonry           1
mathematics       2
meal              1
measure           5
measurement       2
measurements      1
metal             1
mile              2
monument          1

New York          1

object            2
oblong           32
obtuse            1
open              1
oval              5

paper             5
parallel          1
parallelogram     1
park             14
pavements         1
people            2
perfect           2
picture           1
Pillow            2
place             4
plane             1
plot              1
proportion        1
public            2

quadrangle        1

rectangle        15
rectangular       3
rhomboid          1
right             5
Rittenhouse       1
road              1
room              5
round           250
rule              9
ruler             3

saddle            1
seat              1
shape             6
sharp             2
side              1
sides             6
sidewalk          1
size              1
sizing            1
small             6
smooth            1
solid             2
space             1
stand             2
steel             1
straight          7
street            9
streets           1
sugar             1
surface           1
surveyor          1

table            47
thoroughfare      1
times             3
tool             13
tree              1
trees             4
triangle         11
true              1

uneven            1
uniform           1
Union             4
upright           2

village           8

Walk              1
walks             1
wall              1
Washington        4
wide              2
window            1
wood              5

yard              2


81. BUTTER

bad               2
bill              2
biscuit           2
bread           206
breakfast         1
butter            1
butterine         1

cheese           41
churn             4
color             1
composition       1
cooking           1
cottolene         1
country           1
cup               1
cow              29
cows             11
cream            34

dairy             4
dairying          1
diet              2
dinner            2
dish              5
dripping          1

eat              34
eatable          12
eatables          2
eating            6
edible            1
egg               2
eggs             11
emollient         1
excellent         1

farm              1
farmer            1
fat              21
fatty             1
fish              1
flour             1
fly               7
food             63
fresh             3
fudge             1

goat              2
good             14
grease           76
greasy            6
grocer            1

healthful         1

indifference      1
ingredients       1

jam               3
jelly             2

kerosene          1
knife             7

lard             15
luxury            1

meal              1
meat              2
melt              1
melting           2
milk            101
molasses          1
mush              1

nourishment       1
nut               2

oil               9
oily              3
oleomargarine     5

peaches           1
plate             3
pleasant          1
plenty            1
pound             1
pure              1

rancid            2

salt             13
salty             3
salve             1
smear             1
smooth            1
soft             65
softness          2
sour              1
spoon             1
spread            3
square            1
strong            2
substance         1
sugar             4
supper            1
sweet            12

table             2
tallow            1
taste             2
tea               2
thin              1
tub               1

use               1

vegetable         3

yellow           80


82. DOCTOR

administer        1
aid               3
ailment           1
apparatus         1
attendant         2

bad               1
bag               1
beard             2
better            2
bill              3
bills             2
bottle            1
brains            1
brother           1
butcher           1

C.                1
C.                1
care              2
carriage          2
case              1
chief             1
clergyman         1
clever            1
college           1
convenient        1
cure              9

D.                1
D.                1
D.                1
death             1
dentist           6
disease           5
diseases          1
Divinity          1
doctress          1
dog               1
driving           1
Dr.               1
druggist          2

education         2

fakir             2
false             3
father            2
friend            3

G.                1
G.                1
gentleman         1
good             17
goodness          1
great             1
grip              2

healer            5
healing           2
health           18
help              3
helper            1
helpful           1
helpfulness       1
home              1
hospital          8

ill               5
illness          21
inquisitive       2
intelligent       2
interne           1
invalid           1

K.                1
K.                1
killer            1
kind              1

labor             1
laboratory        1
laborer           1
lamp              1
lawyer           36
learned           1
life              1

M.                1
McC.              1
McM.              1
magistrate        1
male              1
man              68
mean              1
medical          19
medicine        149
medicines         1
merchant          1
minister          7
mister            1
money             1
murder            1

N.                1
N.                1
necessity         2
need              1
needed            1
needful           1
nice              1
nurse            41
nurses            1

O.                1
office            1
old               1
one               1
operation         1

P.                1
pain              2
papa              1
patient          23
patients          1
people            1
person            3
pharmacist        1
physical          1
physician       213
pills             1
practitioner      2
priest            6
profession        9
professional      3

quack             1

relief            6
relieved          1
remedy            1

S.                1
satchel           3
science           2
scientist         1
sick             52
sickness        104
smart             3
student           1
suffering         1
supervisor        1
surgeon           5
surgical          1
syringe           1

tend              1
treatment         1
trouble           3
trust             1

useful            2
useless           1

W.                1
W.                1
W.                1
well              1
wise              1
woman             2
work              1


83. LOUD

angry             3
audible           1

band              1
bawl              1
bell              5
bells             2
birds             2
boisterous       38
boy               1
boys              2
bright            1

call              2
called            1
calliope          1
calm              1
cannon           12
check             1
child             1
children          1
city              1
clear             1
course            2
color             2
common            1
confusion         1
cornet            1

deaf              1
deafening         1
din               1
disagreeable      3
discontent        1
dislike           1
drum              3

ear               3
easy             12
explosion         4

fast              3
forte             1

game              1
gong              1
graphophone       1
gun               2
guns              1

hammer            2
hard              2
harsh             3
haughty           1
hear              6
heard             1
heavy             4
high             14
hog               1
holler           16
horn              4

impatient         1

knock             2

laugh             2
laughing          2
lofty             1
long              3
low              57

man               1
masculine         1
megaphone         1
mellow            1
mild              1
mouth             1
music             7

noise           205
noisy           112

objectionable     1
ocean             1
organ             1
owl               1

pain              1
painful           1
people            1
person            2
phonograph        1
piano             2
piercing          1
pistols           1
power             1

quiet            32
quietness         1

racket            1
real              1
report            1
rough             2
rude              2

S.                1
scream            9
sharp             2
shock             1
shout             6
shouting          1
shriek            1
shrill            9
shrinking         1
silent            3
sing              1
singer            1
singing           1
slow              4
smart             1
smooth            1
socks             1
soft            165
softly            1
song              2
sound            25
sounds            2
speak             3
speech            2
spoken            2
still             7
stone             1
strong            8
subway            1
sweet             1

talk             12
talking           1
talker            9
thunder           9
tie               1
tone              1
trolley           1

uncomfortable     1
unpleasant        5

voice            27
voices            1
vulgar            4

whisper           2
whistle          17
wide              1
wind              3

yell              3
yelling           2


84. THIEF

absence           1
abstractor        1
anger             1
arrest            1

bad              14
badness           1
bandit            1
bank              1
beggar            3
being             1
betrayer          1
boy               3
burglar         118
burglary          2

careful           2
catch             2
caught            4
caution           1
chief             1
clerk             1
clothing          1
court             4
crime             2
criminal         15
crook             3
cry               1
culprit           2
cute              1

dangerous         2
dark              4
deceit            1
detective         1
devil             1
dishonest        11
dishonesty        2
dishonor          1
dislike           1
distrustful       1
dirt              1
dog               1
dumb              1

enemy             1
evil              1

fear              2
felon             1

girl              1
glove             1
gold              2
good              1

harsh             1
honest           18
honesty           4
house             4
household         1

ignorant          1
injustice         1
interest          1
Irish             1

jail             11
jewelry           7
jewels            3
judge             1
jury              1
justice           2

killed            1
kleptomaniac      1

laugh             1
law               4
lawyer            1
liar              6
lock              1
loss              3
low               2

man              29
mask              1
McClure's         1
mean              4
meanness          1
men               1
mercenary         1
merchant          2
minister          2
mischief          1
misdemeanor       1
mistake           1
money            16
murder            5
murderer          3

necessity         1
neighbor          1
newspaper         1
night            16
none              1
noted             1

object            1

pencil            1
person            1
pickpocket        2
play              1
pocket            1
pocketbook        1
police            8
policeman        12
poor              1
prison            6
prisons           1
prisoner          1
punishment        2
purse             1

ran               1
rascal            4
reverses          1
revolver          1
rob               8
robber          126
robbery          10
rogue            19
roguish           1
run               1
running           2

scare             1
schemer           1
school            1
scoundrel         4
shot              1
silver            4
silverware        1
sin               1
Sing Sing         1
sinner            1
sly               1
snake             1
sneak             7
sneaking          3
sneaky            1
spoils            1
steal           212
stealing         69
steals            8
stole             9
stolen            9
stealer           2
stealth           1
stealthy          2

take              5
taking            3
time              1
tools             2
tramp             1
treasure          1
troublesome       1
trust             1

ugly              3
undesirable       1
unjust            1
unreliable        1

vagrant           1
valuables         2
vice              2
villain           5
virtue            1

want              1
watch             3
waywardness       1
wicked            4
wickedness        3
window            1
woman             1
wretched          1
wrong             3


85. LION

Africa            4
Androcles         1
anger             1
angry             2
animal          326
animals           3

bear             17
beast            67
beautiful         1
beauty            1
big               2
bird              1
bite              1
blood             1
boisterous        1
bold              2
Bostock's         1
brave             4
bravery           1
Bronx             1

cage             14
camel             1
cat               6
cave              1
Christian         1
circus            2
claws             2
cow               1
crouching         1
cruel             2
cub               5
cubs              2

danger            5
dangerous         6
death             1
den              13
desert            3
devours           1
disturber         1
dog               1

eat               1
eats              1
elephant          3
enraged           1

fear              3
ferocious        16
ferocity          1
fierce           36
fierceness        1
forest            6
fox               1
fright            1
frightened        1

giraffe           1
great             2
growl             1

hair              3
hearted           1
holler            1
horse             1
howl              1
huge              1
hungry            1
hunter            3
hunting           4
hyena             1

interested        1

jealous           1
jungle            5
jungles           1

king             16

L.                1
lamb              6
large             3
lioness          10
lionized          1
lookout           1

majestic          1
majesty           3
mane             13
menagerie         5
mice              1
mighty            1
monkey            1
mouse            27
mule              1

N.                1
noble             1
noise             1

panther           1
park              2
paw               1
picture           1
power             5
powerful          1
prey              1

rage              1
raging            1
revenge           1
roar             45
roars             3
roaring           6
Roosevelt         8
rough             1

savage            1
sea               1
shaggy            1
sharp             1
sheep             1
small             1
stealth           1
stealthy          1
story             1
strength         30
strong           15
Sultan            1

tame              4
tamer             1
tail              1
teeth             1
terrible          1
tiger           102
tigers            2

ugly              7

vicious           5

walks             1
wicked            2
wild             12
wildness          1
wilderness        2
wilds             1
wolf             10
woods             2
wool              1
wrath             1

yellow            1

zoo               5
zoology           1


86. JOY

action            1
amuse             1
amusement         3
anger             1
angry             1
anticipation      1
arrival           1
automobile        4

ball              1
bird              1
birth             1
birthday          1
bitterness        1
bless             1
blessing          1
bliss            10
boy               1
bright            1
brightness        1
buoyant           1

cheer             1
cheerful          2
cheerfulness      3
child             2
children          1
Christmas         2
comes             1
comfort          11
comfortable       1
company           1
complete          1
concert           1
contentment       1

dance             3
dancing           5
delight           6
delighted         2
delightful        2
despair           1

ecstasy           1
elated            2
emotion           1
engaged           1
enjoyment         2
excitement        3
expression        2
extreme           1
exuberance        1

fair              1
family            1
feel              1
feeling           5
felt              1
festivity         1
fine              2
food              1
forever           1
friends           1
fullness          1
fun               6

gaiety            1
gay               1
game              1
gift              1
girl              2
girls             1
glad             27
gladness         44
glee              3
godliness         1
good              7
grand             1
great             7
grief            18

hands             1
happiness       215
happy            71
harmony           1
health            1
heard             1
heart             3
heaven            2
holiday           1
home              6
hope              4

inexpressible     1

joking            1
jubilant          1

lady              1
laugh             7
laughing          4
laughter         15
leap              1
letter            1
life              3
light             2
like              1
line              2
lonely            1
lots              1
love              6
loving            2
lovely            1

man               1
marriage          2
meeting           2
merriment         1
merry             1
mirth             7
money             1
motherhood        1
much              2
music             5

news              1
nice              2
noise             1

outing            1

pain              1
passing           1
peace            23
picnic            1
picnics           1
pleasant          8
pleased           3
pleasure        121
pride             1

quality           1

rapture           4
rejoice           2
rejoicing         1
relief            2
ride              7
riding            2
rider             1


sad               1
sadness          13
sailing           2
Saturday          1
seldom            1
sensation         1
shouting          1
show              2
sing              1
singing           1
smile             2
smiling           1
song              3
sorrow          135
sorry             1
state             1
suffering         1
summer            1
sunlight          1
surprise          6
sweet             4

time              2
triumph           1
trouble           3

unalloyed         1
unattainable      1
unhappiness       2
unhappy           1

vacation          1

water             1
wedding           1
wetness           1
wish              1
wonderful         1
work              2
wrath             1

youth             1


87. BED

animal            1
asleep            1

baby              1
bedding           3
bedstead          4
blanket           4
blankets          3
boat              1
bowl              1
brass             3
bug               2

chair            11
clean             2
cleanliness       1
clothes          12
clothing          2
comfort          35
comforts          1
comfortable      12
cot              11
couch            26
counterpane       1
cover             4
covers            4
covering          1

desired           1
dormitory         1
down              1
dreamland         1

ease              1
easiness          1
easy              2

fatigue           1
feathers          3
flannels          1
floor             1
folding           2
frame             1
furniture        26

go                1
good              7

hammock           2
hard              5
head              1
home              2
house             2

iron              9

joy               1

large             2
lay               8
laziness          1
lie              21
lounge            6
low               2
lying             8

make              1
marriage          1
mattress         21

narrow            1
negro             1
night            11

object            1

pan               1
patient           3
peace             1
pillow           17
pillows           7
pleasure          1
post              3

quilts            1

recline           1
recuperation      1
refreshing        1
repose            9
respite           1
rest            132
resting           5
restful           1
robe              1
room             16

seat              1
sheet             6
sheets            7
shoes             1
sick              2
sickness          5
sleep           345
sleeping         41
sleepiness        3
sleepy            7
slumber           3
sofa              7
soft             31
spread            5
spring            1
springs           1
square            1
stove             1
structure         1

table             2
tick              1
time              1
tired             7
twilight          1

Vassar            1

want              1
warm              1
weariness         1
white             2
whiteness         1
wide              1
wood              4


88. HEAVY

air               1
animal            1
anvil             1
article           1
automobile        1
avoirdupois       1

baby              1
bad               1
bat               1
bed               2
big               3
body              1
books             3
boulders          1
box               1
boxes             1
boy               1
bread             1
brick             1
building          1
bullet            1
bundle            4
burden           12
burdensome        3

cake              1
cannon            1
carpet            1
carry             2
carrying          1
cement            1
chair             1
change            1
cloth             1
clothes           1
cloudy            1
coal              4
coarse            1
coat              1
comfort           1
cumbersome        1

dark              1
difficult         1
dirt              1
disappointment    1
discomfort        1
dope              1
drag              1
drill             1
drowsiness        1
drowsy           10
dull              3

effort            1
elephant          3

F.                1
fall              1
feel              1
firmness          1
full              1

gold              3
gorgeous          1
grief             1
grip              2

hammer            3
hard             38
head              2
heart             1
hearted           2
heft              1
help              1
horse             2
house             1

iron             70
irons             2

labor             1
laden             2
large            18
lead             60
lift              7
lifting           1
light           273
lightness         1
load             57
loadsome          1
loud              1

machine           1
man               4
marble            1
mountain          1
much              1
mud               1
muscle            1
myself            1

no                1

obliging          1
opposing          1
oppression        1
oppressive        1

package           1
pail              1
person            1
piano             1
ponderous         2
pound             1
pounds            1
pressure          2

quicksilver       1
quiet             2

rock              2
rough             1

safe              2
sand              1
satchel           1
scales            1
sharp             1
ship              1
short             1
sickness          1
sleep             3
sleeping          1
slothful          1
slumber           1
soft              5
soggy             1
solid             3
sound             1
steel             1
stone            17
stones            2
stout             2
stove             3
strain            1
strength          4
strong            3
study             1
suit              1

table             5
thick             3
things            1
thoughtful        1
tired            21
tiresome          2
ton               4
tough             1
trunk             3

uncomfortable     1
underwear         1

very              1

weak              1
weariness         3
weary             3
weather           1
weigh             1
weighing          1
weight          177
weighted          1
weighty          22
wood              4
work              2


89. TOBACCO

amber             1
anger             1

bad              10
bite              1
bitter            4
Bob               1
breath            1
brown             7

chew             28
chewing          13
cigar            19
cigars           17
cigarette        12
cigarettes        6
comfort           2
curse             1

death             1
decay             1
deviltry          1
dirty             6
disagreeable      3
disgust           1
disgusting        1
drug              3
Durham            1

elevate           1
enjoyed           1
enjoyment         1
execrable         1
exhilaration      1
evil              1

field             1
fields            1
filth             4
filthiness        1
filthy            1
food              1

garden            1
good              5
green             3
grower            1
growing           1

habit            12
habits            1
hard              1
herb              3
herbs             1
horrid            1
horrors           1

Indian            1
injurious         3
intoxicate        1

juice             7

leaf             17
leaves            2
light             1
liquor            1
lungs             1
luxury            2

man               3
men               1

narcotic         10
nasty             2
nausea            1
nicotine         18
none              1
not               1
nuisance          1

obnoxious         1
odor              3
odorous           1
opium             4

pipe             69
pipes             3
plant            38
plants            1
pleasant          3
pleasure          2
poison            6
poor              1
pouch             2
plug              1

refrain           1
ruin              1

scent             1
sensation         1
sin               1
smell             5
smoke           387
smoking          98
smoker            1
snuff            15
solace            1
spit              4
stalk             1
stars             1
stimulant         1
stimulants        1
strong            7
substance         1
suffocation       1
sugar             2
sweet             2

tasty             1
tobacco           1

unclean           1
unnecessary       2
unpleasant        2
unwholesome       1
use               2
used              1
useful            1
useless           2

vegetable         3
vice              1
Virginia          2
weed             44
weeds             1
whiff             1
whiskey           1
wickedness        1

yellow            1


90. BABY

animal            1

beautiful         5
beauty            2
beginning         1
being             3
bib               1
big               1
birth             1
blessing          1
blue              1
body              2
bonnet            1
born              2
bottle            6
boy              32
bread             1
buggy             1
bundle            1

cap               1
care              3
carriage         28
cart              2
child           239
children          3
childhood         1
chubby            1
clothes           4
comfort           3
cradle           22
creation          1
crib              1
crooning          1
cross             2
cries             3
cry              37
crying           29
cunning           3
cute              8
cuteness          1

darling           4
daughter          1
delicate          1
dirty             1
doll              1
dress             6

embryonic         1
eyes              1

fair              1
family            2
fat               5
father            1
feet              1
female            1
flesh             1
food              1
friend            1
future            1

girl             26
good              1
goodness          1
growth            1

happiness         1
happy             1
harmless          1
helpless          1
helplessness      4
home              4
human             3

infant          168
infinitesimal     1
innocence        10
innocent          4

joy               7
jump              1

kid               4

lamb              1
laugh             1
laughing          2
Lawrence          1
life              2
light             1
little           12
Lorenzo           1
love              9
loveliness        1
lovely            1

mama              2
man               4
mankind           1
Mary              1
milk              1
mother           41

name              1
nice              5
noise             6
noisy             1
nuisance          3
nurse             7

offspring         2

pacifier          1
paper             1
person            2
pink              2
play              1
pleasant          1
pleasure          3
population        1
powder            1
pretty            7

rattle            4
rocker            1
round             1
Ruth              2

sex               1
sick              1
sickness          1
simple            1
simplicity        1
sister            2
sleep             4
slight            1
small            42
smallest          1
smiling           1
soft              3
softness          2
squalls           2
squeal            1
squealing         1
stout             1
sunshine          1
sweet            23
sweetness         7
syrup             1

talk              1
talks             1
tiny              1
trouble           5
two               1

walking           1
weak              1
weakness          1
wee               1
white             1
wife              2
woman             5

yell              2
young            12
youngster         1
youth             4



91. MOON

astronomer        1
astronomy         1
atmosphere        1

ball              2
beam              2
beams             1
beautiful         7
beauty            6
body              7
bright           52
brightness        7
brilliant         1

calm              1
change            1
cheese            4
circle            1
circular          1
clear             3
clouds            2
cold              4
coldness          1
crescent          8
cute              1

dark              2
delicate          1
delightful        1
dim               1
distance          4
dreaming          1

earth             5
eclipse           3
equator           1
evening           6

fair              1
fire              2
firmament         1
full             10

girl              1
globe             1
glowing           1
grand             1
great             1
guard             1

half              3
heaven            2
heavens           3
high              4
illumination      1

lady              1
lake              1
large             9
light           231
love              3
loveliness        1
lovely            2
lunar             3

man               8
moonlight         3
mountain          1
mystery           1

necessary         1
new               3
night            66

object            1
ocean             1
one               1
orbit             1

pale              2
planet           23
planets           1
pleasant          1

quiet             1

reflection        1
rise              1
rises             1
rising            1
round            33

satellite         4
sea               2
see               1
seeing            l
sentimental       1
shine            26
shines            4
shining          12
shiny            12
silver            4
silvery           6
size              1
sky              73
solar             1
sound             1
splendid          1
spoon             2
spooning          1
star             32
stars            93
starlight         1
steamer           1
stone             1
struck            2
sun             120
sweet             1

turkey            1

valuable          1

wan               1
water             2
white             8
wish              1

yellow           11



92. SCISSORS

apart             1
article           4

barber            2
blade             1
blades            1
blunt             1

cloth            35
clothing          1
cord              1
crooked           1
crossed           2
cut             347
cutting         114
cutlery           1

dress             1
dressmaker        2
dressmaking       3
dull              6

edge              1

fate              1
firecrackers      1
flowers           1

garments          2
glistening        1
goods             5
grating           1
grind             7

handle            1
handy             1

implement         6
instrument       36
instruments       1

knife            66
knives            6

lever             1
linen             1
lost              1

machine           2
material          1
metal             1
millinery         1
mother            1

nails             1
necessity         1
needle            4
needles           4
nickle            1
nippers           1

paper             6
point             1
pointed           1

razor             1
ruching           1

Sarah             1
screw             1
severing          1
sew               2
swing            10
sharp           190
sharpness         6
sharpen           1
shears           40
shut              2
silver            1
skirt             1
spool             1
steel            23
string            1

tailor            2
thimble           3
thread            4
tongs             1
tool             10
tools             1
trousers          1

useful            1
usefulness        1
utensil           1

weapon            1
woman             1
work              2



93. QUIET

action            1
alone             2
always            1
asleep            1

baby              2
beautiful         1
beauty            1
bed               1
behave            2
boisterous        5
bore              1
boy               1
breeze            1
brook             1
butterfly         1

calm             20
cattle            1
child             6
children          1
church            4
color             1
comfort           2
comfortable       1
composed          1
contented         2
country          21
Creal             1
cricket           1
cross             3

dark              3
darkness          1
day               8
death             2
degree            1
demure            3
disposition       1
docile            1
dreary            1
dull              1
dumb              1

ease              8
easiness          1
easy             49
evening           5

family            1
feeling           1

genteel           1
gentle            3
gentleman         1
girl              2
good              7
green             1

happy             1
harmless          2
harsh             1
heaven            1
home              6
hour              1
house             3
hospital          2
humble            1

joy               1

landscape         1
laughing          1
library           1
life              2
like              1
loneliness        1
lonely            3
lonesome          2
looks             1
lovely            l
loud             48
low               1

man               1
melancholy        1
mind              1
Miss K.           1
moon              1
mountains         1
music             1
myself            1

nature            1
nice              2
night            38
noise            50
noiseless        16
noisiness         1
noisy           113
nook              1

park              1
peace            12
peaceable         2
peaceful         52
peacefulness      4
people            2
person           11
place             4
pleasant          4
pleasure          3

quick             1
quite             2

rabbits           1
refined           1
relief            1
repose            6
reserved          1
rest             68
resting           4
restful          19
restless          2
room              6
rough             1

sad               1
sea               1
serene            1
sheep             1
sickness          1
silence          18
silent           15
sleep            24
sleeping          3
sleepy            1
slow              3
slowness          1
slumber           1
slumbers          1
smart             1
smooth            1
sober             1
soft             10
softly            1
softness          1
solemn            3
solitude          2
soothing          3
sound             4
soundless         2
speechless        1
state             1
steady            2
still           136
stillness        16
study             2
stupid            1
subdued           1
summer            1
Sunday            1
sweet             2

talk              2
time              1
times             1
timid             1
tomb              1
tranquil          1
tree              1
twilight          1

village           1
violent           1
voice             1

walk              1
water             1
well              1
Wilton            1
wish              1
wood              1
woods            10


94. GREEN

apple             8

beautiful         2
bird              1
black            13
bloomy            1
blotter           2
blue             46
book              1
bright            5
brown             8
butterfly         1

cabbage           1
calm              1
carpet            1
cheese            1
cloth             3
color           200
colors            1
comfort           1
corn              1
country           1
covetous          1
cucumber          2
curtain           1

dark              8
Dartmouth         1
definite          1
dress             6

earth             2
envy              3
Erin              1
eyes              4

farmer            1
favorite          1
field            12
fields           10
flag              3
flower            4
flowers           2
foliage           2
food              1
foolishness       1
forest            1
fresh             3
fruit             1

gay               1
glasses           1
gold              1
grand             1
grapes            1
grass           284
gray              5
grew              1
grief             1
ground            1

hat               1
hill              1
horn              2
horrid            1
hue               1

Ireland           6
Irish            14

jealousy          1

landscape         1
laurel            1
lawn              5
leaf              8
leaves           13
light             4

meadow            1
meadows           1
mountain          2

name              1
nature            4

ocean             1
olive             1
orange            2

paint             3
paper             2
peaceful          1
peas              2
pink             11
plant             6
plants            1
pleasant          2
pleasing          1
pretty            4
purple            6

quiet             2

red              42
restful           6
ribbon            2
ripe              2

sea               2
shade             4
shamrock          2
shutters          1
sight             1
silk              1
sky               1
slow              1
small             1
soft              1
sour              2
spinach           1
spring            9
stain             1
summer            1

tea               1
tree             10
trees            29

unripe            1

vegetable         1
vegetables        1
verdant           3
verdure           1

warning           1
wearing           1
white            31
wood              1
woods             2

yellow           54
young             1



95. SALT

acrid             1
air               3
apple             1
apples            2
article           1

barre             1
barren            1
bath              1
beef              1
bitter           40
bowl              1
box               1
bread             2
brine             2
bromide           1
butter            7

celery            2
cellar            9
chemical          2
codfish           1
condiment         2
cook              1
cooking           2
cows              1
cream             1

deposit           1
digestible        1
dinner            3
dirt              1
disagreeable      1
dish              1
drink             1
dry               2

earth             5
eat              17
eatable           7
eating            8
eggs              2
epileptics        1

finish            1
fish              4
flavor           21
flavoring         3
food             46
France            1
fresh            11

glass             1
good              9

halite            1
ham               1
hard              4
horrid            1

ice-cream         1
ingredient        1

Kenilworth        1
kitchen           1

Lake              1
life              1
lot               1

mackerel          4
marsh             1
meat             18
meats             1
medicinal         1
melt              1
mine              2
mines             3
mineral          37
mustard           1

NaCl              1
necessary         5
necessity         3
needed            1
needful           1
nice              1

ocean            36

pantry            1
paper             1
pasture           1
pepper          142
petre             1
physic            1
pickles           1
pork              5
potassium         1
potato            2
potatoes          4
powder            1
preparation       1
preservation      2
preservatives     1
preserving        1

quotation         1

refreshing        1
relish            4
rock              7
rocks             1

saline            1
saltpetre         1
salty             3
sandwiches        1
Saratoga          1
saving            1
savor            10
savory            1
sea              18
season           12
seasoning        31
shake             2
shaker            4
sharp             8
sheep             1
smart             1
snapping          1
sodium            1
soup              2
sour             18
spice             5
spill             1
stickiness        1
sugar            88
sweet            27
Syracuse          1

table            14
tart              2
taste            87
tasting           1
tasteful          2
tasty             6
tasteless         1
temper            1
thirst            4
thirsty           2
trees             1

use               7
useful            2
uses              1
using             1

vegetable         5
vegetables        1
victuals          1
vinegar           1

water            34
wet               2
white            36



96. STREET

air               1
alley            18
asphalt           6
automobiles       1
avenue           63
avenues           1

better            1
bitter            1
block            12
boulevard         3
Bowery            1
boy               2
brick             1
broad             2
Broadway          6
Brooklyn          1
building          1
business          1
busy              4
byway             1

car              10
cars              8
carriage          1
city             82
Clarkson          1
clean             7
cleaner           1
colors            1
confusion         1
congestion        1
corner            2
country           1
crooked           2
cross             1
crowd             3
crowded           1

dark              1
Devon             1
direct            1
directions        1
dirt              4
dirty             5
distance          1
drive             1
driving           1
driveway          2
dry               1
dust              4
dusty             5
dwellings         1

earth             1
Eighty-sixth      1
Eleventh          1
Elm               1
even              1

fertile           1
Fifteenth         1
fine              1
flags             2
Forty-third       1

garden            1
going             1
gravel            1
gutter            2

hard              1
heat              1
Hester            1
highway           7
home              1
horses            2
hot               1
house            11
houses           21
hustle            1

land              3
lane             21
large             1
length            1
light             1
live              2
location          2
lonely            1
long             29

Main              5
Market            1
Maxfield          1
motion            1
mud               1
musician          1

name              2
narrow           21
New York          3
nice              1
noise             8
noisy             5
number           12
numbers           1

One-fifteenth     1
One-sixteenth     1
opening           1

passage          11
passageway        1
passway           2
path             12
pathway           2
pave              1
paved            13
pavement         25
paving            1
pebble            1
pecan             1
people           22
place            16
Pleasant          2
Pleasure          1
pretty            2

racket            1
residence         1
road             91
roads             4
roadway           2

see               1
shopping          1
short             3
sidewalk         26
sidewalks         2
Sixty-seventh     1
Sixty-third       2
smooth            2
space             1
square            4
stone             8
stones            8
straight         17
sun               1
sweep             1

tenements         1
terrace           1
thoroughfare     23
town             26
tracks            1
traffic           7
travel            8
tree              1
trees             1
trolley           2
turmoil           1

vehicles          1
village           9

wagon             3
wagons            2
walk             78
walking          23
walks             2
Wall              1
Washington        1
way              14
wet               1
white             1
wide             35
width             1
Woodhull          1



97. KING

Albert            1
all               1
Alphonso          3
antiquity         1
Arthur            1
authority         4

bad               1
boss              1

card              1
cards             1
chess             2
chief             1
command           3
commanding        1
commander         9
conqueror         2
country          13
court             1
courtier          1
crown            63
crowned           2

daughter          1
diamonds          1
dignity           1
dislike           1
dog               1
duke              1

Edward           30
emperor          11
empire            3
England          20
ermine            1

family            1
farce             1
first             1
fool              1
foreign           1
friend            1

garment           1
George            2
glory             1
good              1
govern            1
government        4
governor          6
great             2
greatness         1

Hamlet            1
happy             1
head              8
helmet            1
Henry             2
high              2
Holland           1
honorable         1
horrible          1

imperial          1
inheritance       1
Italy             1

John              1
judgement         1

Kaiser            2
king              1
kingdom           5

large             1
law               1
leader            2
lion              1
lord              1
Louis XVI.        1
loyal             1

majestic          1
majesty           8
male              2
man              43
master            3
mean              1
Midas             1
monarch          49
monarchy          4

nation            1
nobility          1
noble             3
nobleman          2
none              1

officer           1
old               1

palace            2
person            6
picture           1
pompous           2
Power            18
powerful          4
president         4
princess          1
Prussia           1

queen           354

regal             1
regent            1
reign             8
rich              1
Richard           1
royal             2
royalty           5
rule             10
rules             4
ruler           162

saxony            1
scepter           2
slave             1
somebody          1
sovereign         8
Spain             1
stories           1
subject           2
supreme           1

throne           21
title             1
town              1
tyrant            1


98. CHEESE

American          2

bacteria          1
bad               2
beer              2
biscuit           1
bitter            6
box               2
bread            56
brick             1
butter          136
buttermilk        2

cake              8
Camembert         2
casein            1
chalk             1
cheesecloth       1
churn             1
cloth             4
cold              1
color             4
corn              1
cow               9
cows              3
cracker           1
crackers         30
cream            30
creamery          1
crust             1
curd              9
curds             3
cut               2
cutter            1

dairy             4
delicatessen      2
derby             1
diet              2
digestible        1
digestion         1
dinner            2
dish              1
dislike           4
Dutch             1

eagle             1
eat              67
eating           29
eaten             1
eatable          19
eatables          3
edible            1
eggs              2

factory           1
fat               2
feast             1
fine              1
fondness          1
food             91
fresh             2
fromage de Brie   1

good             15
green             5
grocer            1
grocery           1

ham               1
hard              2
head              1
heap              1
hole              2
holes             2
holey             2
hoops             1
hunger            1
hungry            1

indigestion       1

jam               1

kind              1
knife             4

Limburger        13
lump              1
lunch             2

macaroni          1
maggot            1
maggots           2
meat              1
mice             25
microbes          1
mild              1
milk            106
milky             1
mixture           1
moon              2
mould             1
mouldy            1
mouse            13
mustard           2

nice              1
nourishment       1
nutrition         1

odor              9
odorous           1

pickles           1
pie               6
plain             1
plate             1
poor              1
poultry           1
price             1
product           2

rarebit           4
rat               8
rats              7
red               1
resentment        1
rich              1
Roquefort         4
rough             1
round             2

sage              1
salt              1
sandwich          8
sandwiches        2
sauce             1
scent             1
Switzer           2
sharp             3
skippers          1
smell            33
smells            1
soft              7
solid             2
sour              5
strengthening     1
strong           12
sugar             1
supper            5
sweet             2
Swiss            16
Switzerland       1

taste             8
tasty             1
thin              1

vegetable         5
vegetables        1

wafers            1
white             3
worms             1

yellow           32



99. BLOSSOM

apple            50
apples            4
art               1

beautiful        10
beauty            9
beginning         1
berries           1
bloom            28
blooming          7
blow              1
book              1
bright            4
bud              23
buds              3
bursting          1
bush              1
bushes            2
buttercups        1

cherries          5
cherry            4
clematis          1
clover            1
color             5
colors            1
country           1

dainty            1
daisy             2
delicate          1

eat               1

fair              2
falling           1
falls             1
field             3
flower          467
flowers          73
foliage           1
forth             2
fragrance         6
fragrant          4
frail             1
fruit            39

garden            2
gin               1
girl              1
green             1
grow              2
growth            2

handsome          1
happiness         1
hepatica          1

leaf              3
leaves            1
lilacs            2
lily              1

magnificent       1
May               2
mimosa            1

nice              1

odor              2
orange            2
orchard           2

pansies           1
pansy             1
peacefulness      1
peach             4
petal             1
petals            1
picking           1
pink              7
plant            13
pleasure          1
plum              1
pour              1
pretty           15

red               3
rose             17
roses             4

scent             1
seeds             1
shrubberies       1
small             1
smell             2
soft              1
spring           23
sprout            1
stem              1
summer            4
sun               1
sweet            15

T.                1
tree             40
trees            17

vine              1
violet            3

weeds             1
white             8

yellow            2
youth             1



100. AFRAID

accidents         1
action            1
alarm             2
always            2
anger             3
angry             2
animal            2
animals           2
anxiety           1
automobile        2
awful             1

backwardness      1
bad               2
bashful           2
battle            1
bears             1
blow              1
bold              2
boy               1
brave            18
bravery           1
brother           1
burglar           3
burglars          2

careful           1
cat               2
cheerfulness      1
child             8
children          1
cold              1
comfort           1
comforted         1
company           1
confidence        1
conscience        1
courage          11
courageous        5
cow               1
cows              1
coward           53
cowardice         5
cowardly          3
crowd             1
crying            1

danger           15
dangerous         2
dare              1
dark            114
darkness         16
death             2
deep              1
depressed         1
desire            1
dislike           1
do                1
dog               1
dogs              1
don't             1
doubt             1
dread             7
dreading          1
dreadful          1
dream             1

emotion           2

faith             2
fear            197
fearful           8
fearless          8
feeling           2
fierce            1
forward           1
fright            9
frighten          2
frightened       48
frightful         1
frog              1

gallant           1
ghost             4
ghosts            2
girl              1
go                4
goblins           1
God               1
guilty            1

happy             1
harm              2
heart             1
heroism           1
hide              1
home              1
hope              1
horse             1
hurt              1

insect            1

joy               1
joyful            1

licked            1
lightning         1
lion              3
loneliness        1
lonely            3
lonesome          5
loss              1

man               3
manner            1
memory            1
mild              1
Miss K.           1
mice              1
mouse             2

need              1
nerve             2
nerves            1
nervous          55
nervousness       4
never             3
night            12
no                3
nobody            1
noise             2
noisy             1
not               1
nothing           5

obsession         1
opposition        1

palpitation       1
patient           1
patients          1
plucky            1
police            1

quiet             1

rat               1
rats              1
retreat           1
riot              1
robbers           2
rocks             1
run               4
running           1

scare             1
scared          106
scary             1
scream            1
sensitive         1
shiver            1
shrinking         2
shudder           1
shy               2
sickness          1
sleep             1
soldier           1
somebody          1
sore              1
sorrow            2
sorry             1
spirit            1
spiritual         1
startled          1
startling         1
stay              1
stillness         1
strong            1
suddenness        1
suffering         1
sure              1

tempted           1
terrified         1
terror            9
thief             3
thought           1
threaten          1
thunder           1
timid            55
timidity          2
to-night          1
tremble           2
trouble           1
trust             1

unable            1
uncertain         1
uneasy            5
unhappiness       1
unknown           1
unprotected       1

woman             1
women             1
worried           1
worry             3



APPENDIX TO THE FREQUENCY TABLES



General Rules

1. Any word combination which is to be found in the frequency
tables, but only in the reverse order from that in which it occurs
in a test record under consideration, is to be classed as a normal
reaction.

2. Any reaction word which is a synonym or an antonym of
the corresponding stimulus word is to be classed as normal.


1. TABLE

Any food or meal.

Any room or apartment

Any article of table linen, china, silver, or furnishings.

Word designating any special variety of tables.

Any word pertaining to appetite.


2. DARK

Any source of illumination.

Any enclosure from which light is wholly or in a large measure
excluded.

Word referring to physiological pigmentation of tissues exposed to
view.

Any division of the diurnal cycle.

Any color or coloring material.

Anything which obscures light.


3. MUSIC

Any musical instrument.

Name of any composer or musician.

Special or general name of any musical composition.

Term designating rhythm, tempo, loudness, or pitch.

Name of any dance.

Term expressing subjective effect of music.


4. SICKNESS

Term designating any disease, symptom, injury, or physiological
function.

Any cause of disease.

Any means or measure of treatment of disease.

Any anatomical organ or region.

Word denoting mode of termination, results, consequences, or indirect
effects of disease.

Any term of prognostic import.

Common or proper name of any person.


5. MAN

Word denoting or implying age of a person.

Any of the well-known male sexual characteristics.

Occupation or profession more or less peculiarly masculine.

Word pertaining to familial relationships or domestic organization.

Word pertaining to sexual relationships; any word denoting the
opposite sex.

The proper name of any male person.

Any article of male apparel.


6. DEEP

Any vessel or container.

Any natural or artificial body of water.

Any depression of surface.

Any object naturally situated or often artificially placed at a
comparatively great distance below the surface.

Any act of progress from surface to depth.


7. SOFT

Any article of food.

Any fabric.


8. EATING

Any article of table linen, china, or silver.

Any organ of digestion; any function of nutrition.

Any article of food; any meal.

Any private or public eating place.

Word denoting taste.


9. MOUNTAIN

Name of any mountain, mountain range, or mountainous country.

Word pertaining to shape, geological composition, fauna, or flora of
mountains or mountainous regions.

Any term of physical geography.


10. HOUSES

Any place of house location.

Any part of a house.

Any material used in the construction of a house.

Any part of the process of construction of a house.

Laborer or mechanic having to do with the construction of a house.

Any commercial term pertaining to ownership, taxes, mortgages, sale,
renting, or occupancy of a house.

Any article of furniture.


11. BLACK

Any object or substance that is always or often black or dark in
color.

Any color.

Word denoting limitation or obscuration of light.

Any word clearly related to the word Black used as a proper name.


12. MUTTON

Any article of food; any meal.

Any animal, or class or group of animals, whose meat is used for human
consumption as food.

Any article of table linen, china, silver; any cooking utensil.

Word designating any person engaged in the preparation of meats for
consumption.

Word denoting any process employed in the preparation of meats for
consumption.


13. COMFORT

Any agreeable or disagreeable subjective state.

Any object, act, or condition that contributes to comfort or produces
discomfort.


14. HAND

Any simple function of the hand; work requiring special manipulation.

Word denoting skill or any degree of skill.

Any part or any tissue of the body.


15. SHORT

Any word involving the concept of duration.

Common or proper name of any person.

Any word denoting shape, relative or absolute dimension, or distance.

Any object in which characteristically one dimension exceeds any
other.


16. FRUIT

Any article of food; any meal.

Any process employed in the cultivation of fruits or in their
preparation for consumption.

Word designating any person engaged in the cultivation of fruits or in
their preparation for consumption.

Any article of table linen, china, or silver.


17. BUTTERFLY

Any bird, worm, or insect

Any flower.

Any color.


18. SMOOTH

Any object possessing a smooth surface as a characteristic feature.

Any fabric.


19. COMMAND

Word denoting any means of influence of one mind upon another intended
to produce acquiescence.

Word denoting or implying acquiescence or lack of it.

Term applied to any commanding officer or to any person in authority.


20. CHAIR

Any article of furniture.

Any room or apartment


21. SWEET

Any substance having a sweet taste.

Common or proper name of a child' or woman.


22. WHISTLE

Any instrument or any animal producing a shrill musical sound.



33. WOMAN

Word denoting or implying age of a person.

Any of the well-known female sexual characteristics.

Occupation or profession more or less peculiarly feminine.

Word pertaining to familial relationships or domestic organization.

Word pertaining to sexual relationships; any word denoting the
opposite sex.

Name of any female person.

Any article of female apparel.


24. COLD

Name of any location characterized by low temperature.

Any illness or symptom which may be caused by exposure to cold.

Any division of the annual cycle.

Any food that is always or often served cold.

Any means or measure of protection against cold.

Any state of the natural elements causing a sensation of cold.

Word denoting subjective characterization of or reaction to cold.


25. SLOW

Any means or manner of locomotion.

Any word involving the concept of rate of progress with reference
either to time or to intensity of action.

Common or proper name of any person.


26. WISH

Word implying fulfillment of a wish either by achievement or through
acquiescence.

Word implying non-fulfillment of a wish.

Word denoting any state of longing or anticipation.

Word denoting any state free from longing or anticipation.

Word denoting a prayer or request.

Word denoting a state of happiness.


27. RIVER

Any body of water.

Any part of a river.

Any plant or animal living in rivers.

Any term of physical geography.

Any vessel or contrivance for navigation.


28. WHITE

Any object or substance that is always or often white or very light in
color.

Any color.

Any word clearly related to the word White used as a proper name.


29. BEAUTIFUL

Any word denoting aesthetic pleasure.

Name or any female person.

Any product of the fine arts or of decorative handicraft.

Any decorative plant or flower.

Any article of attire.

Natural scenery.

Any division of the diurnal cycle.


30. WINDOW

Any word pertaining to illumination.

Word pertaining to movements of air.

Any attachment to a window for the control of transmission of light or
air.

Any building or apartment


31. ROUGH

Any object or substance which is characteristically rough to the
touch.

Word denoting or implying irregularity of surface.

Any skin lesion which may impart to the skin the quality of roughness.

Any word implying carelessness, lack of consideration, or crudeness;
any word used to designate action or conduct which may be
characterized as careless, inconsiderate, or crude.


32. CITIZEN

Any word pertaining to political organization, or to factors either
favorable or unfavorable to it.

Any term or proper name of political geography.

Common or proper name of any male person.


33. FOOT

Any means or manner of locomotion involving the use of the feet.

Any part or any tissue of the animal body.

Any article of foot-wear.

Any way constructed or used for walking.

Any unit of linear measure.



34. SPIDER

Word employed to designate subjective characterization of or reaction
to an object of dislike.

Any insect.

Word pertaining to the characteristic habits of spiders, with
reference either to location and construction of nest, or to manner of
catching prey.


35. NEEDLE

Any material used in making clothes.

Any special sewing operation; any occupation in which sewing
constitutes part of the work.

Any special kind of needles.

Any instrument which is used in connection with a needle in any
operation, or of which a needle forms a part.


36. RED

Word which may be used to express subjective characterization of the
red color.

Any object or substance which is always or often red in color.

Anything which is by convention or common usage connected with the red
color.

Any organ, tissue, or lesion, exposed to view, which may have a red
color imparted to it by the blood or by physiological pigment

Any color or coloring material.

Any word implying light through incandescence.


37. SLEEP

Word denoting somnolence or a state of lowered consciousness; anything
which is a cause of somnolence or of lowered consciousness; anything
which induces a desire to sleep.

Word denoting a state of active consciousness or a transition from
lowered to more active consciousness.

Any division of the diurnal cycle.

Any word more or less commonly used to characterize sleep in any way.

Any article of bedding, bed-linen, or night-clothes.

Any article of furniture used for sitting or lying.


38. ANGER

Any affective state; any common demonstration of emotion.

Any common cause or provocation of anger.

Action or conduct caused by anger; word used to characterize such
action or conduct.


39. CARPET

Any material of which carpets are made.

Any article of house furniture, hangings, or decorations.

Word denoting home, house, or any part of a house.

Word pertaining to the manufacture or care of carpets, or denoting a
person engaged in the manufacture, sale, or care of carpets.

Any country especially noted for the manufacture of carpets or rugs.

Any color.


40. GIRL

Word denoting or implying age of a person.

Any of the well-known female sexual characteristics.

Occupation or profession more or less peculiarly feminine.

Word pertaining to familial relationships or domestic organization.

Word pertaining to sexual relationships; any word denoting the
opposite sex.

Name of any female person.

Any part of a person's body.

Any article of female apparel.


41. HIGH

Any word denoting or implying skill, training, achievement, or
position.

Any word denoting or implying valuation.

Any architectural structure.

Any object of which the vertical dimension characteristically exceeds
any other.

Any act of progress from a lower to a higher level.

Name of any mountain or mountain range.

Anything characteristically situated at a high level.

Anything characteristically variable in height.


42. WORKING

Any occupation, profession, art, or labor.

Direct results or consequences of work.

Any place of employment.

Rest, recreation, inaction, or disinclination to work.

Word denoting energy, material, capital, equipment.


43. SOUR

Any substance or object which is always or often sour in taste.

Any word denoting a taste or flavor quality.


44. EARTH

Any substance which enters into the composition of soil.

Word pertaining to the utilization or cultivation of natural
resources; any product of agriculture.

Any term of physical geography, geology, mineralogy, meteorology, or
astronomy.


45. TROUBLE

Any affective state.

Any general cause of active emotional states.

Any common manifestation of emotion.

Word denoting or implying defeat.

Word denoting or implying caution or lack of it.

Any task.


46. SOLDIER

Word pertaining to military organization.

Word pertaining to any military operation.

Word pertaining to military discipline or to military decoration.

Any article of military or naval equipment or attire.

Common or proper name of any male person.

Name of any country.

Word pertaining to political organization.


47. CABBAGE

Any article of food; any meal.

Any article of table linen, china, silver; any cooking utensil.

Any process of cooking.

Word used to designate any person engaged in the cultivation of
cabbages or in their preparation for consumption.


48. HARD

Any solid article of food.

Word denoting or implying impact.

Any task or labor.

Any substance which is hard or unyielding.

Any agency or process by which a substance is solidified or hardened.

Any article of furniture used for sitting or lying.

Any trait of disposition characterized by lack of readiness to yield
or lack of consideration for others.


49. EAGLE

Any bird.

Any piece of currency.

Anything in connection with which the word eagle is used in a symbolic
sense.


50. STOMACH

Any anatomical organ or region.

Any article of food; any meal.

Word pertaining to ingestion and assimilation of food.

Term denoting health or disease; any medicament.


51. STEM

Any object which has a stem.

Any part of a plant.

Any object which is long, slender, and more or less rigid.


52. LAMP

Any means or source of illumination.

Word denoting or implying illumination.


53. DREAM

Any product of imagination.

Any psychical phenomenon; any part of the psychical organ.

Word denoting or implying unreality or uselessness.

Word denoting or implying mystery or occultism.

Any division of the diurnal cycle.

Any article of bedding, bed-linen or night-clothes.

Any article of furniture used for sitting or lying.

Any narcotic substance.


54. YELLOW

Word which may be used to denote subjective characterization of the
yellow color.

Any object or substance which is always or often yellow in color.

Any color or coloring material.


55. BREAD

Any article of food; any meal

Any article of table linen, china, or silver; any cooking utensil.

Any private or public eating place.

Word pertaining to ingestion and assimilation of food.

Any ceremony in connection with which bread is used.


56. JUSTICE

Any word implying crime or tendency to crime, legal trial, retribution
or lack of it, or repentance.

Any officer of the law.

Word pertaining to judiciary organization.

Word denoting any kind of ethical relationship.

Any deity.

The name of any justice or judge.

Any function of a judicial authority.

Any word denoting or implying equality.


57. BOY

Word denoting or implying age of a person.

Word pertaining to familial relationships or domestic organization.

Word pertaining to sexual relationships; any word denoting the
opposite sex.

Common or proper name of any male person.

Any part of a person's body.

Any article of male apparel.

Any common boys toy or game.

Word pertaining to educational organization.


58. LIGHT

Any source, apparatus, or means of illumination.

Any color or coloring material.

Word implying light through incandescence.

Any term of optics; any optical phenomenon.

Any object or substance which is characteristically light in weight.


59. HEALTH

Any emotion; any common manifestation of emotion.

Any disease or symptom.

Word pertaining to prevention or treatment of disease.

Word pertaining to any normal bodily function.

Word pertaining to the preservation of health.

Word denoting or implying a state of health.

Any athletic sport or form of exercise.

Any anatomical organ or region.


60. BIBLE

Name of any personage mentioned in the Bible.

Any religion or religious denomination.

Any name or attribute employed in reference to the Deity.

Any article or act of religious ritual.

Word denoting or implying belief, disbelief, or doubt.

Any term of theology.


61. MEMORY

Word pertaining to operations, faculties, endowment, training, or condition of the mind.

Word denoting any degree of accuracy.

Word denoting the cranium; any part of the psychical organ.

Word pertaining to the past.

Any word implying transiency.

Any subject of study involving the exercise of memory.

Any method or means for the reinforcement of memory.

Any of the senses.

Word denoting retention.


62. SHEEP

Any animal raised or hunted for clothing material, for food, or for
its services as a beast of burden.

Any product manufactured from the skin or wool of sheep.

Any of the more or less distinctive characteristics of sheep.

Any food product derived from sheep.


63. BATH

Word denoting or implying an effect of bathing on the body.

Any body of water.

Any kind of bath; any part of bath, lavatory, or toilet equipment.

Any material of which a bathing equipment is largely made.

Word denoting a state of partial or complete undress.

Any beach or bathing resort.

Any aquatic feat of gymnastics.


64. COTTAGE

Word pertaining to landscape gardening.

Any place of cottage location.

Any part of a house; any color.

Any material used in the construction of a cottage.

Any laborer or mechanic having to do with the construction of a cottage.

Any part of the process of construction of a cottage.

Any commercial term pertaining to ownership, taxes, mortgages, sale,
renting, or occupancy of a cottage.

Any article of furniture.


65. SWIFT

Any means or manner of locomotion.

Word denoting or implying motion or rate of motion.

Any animal or familiar object characterized by rapid locomotion.

Any word clearly related to the word Swift used as a proper name.


66. BLUE

Word which may be used to express subjective characterization of the
blue color.

Any object or substance which is always or often blue in color.

Anything which is by convention or common usage connected with the
blue color.

Any organ, tissue, or lesion, exposed to view, which may have a blue
color imparted to it by the blood or by physiological pigment.

Any color or coloring material.


67. HUNGRY

Any animal.

Any article of food; any meal.

Word denoting taste or flavor.

Word denoting or implying privation or torture.

Any article of table linen, china, or silver.

Any private or public eating place.

Any organ of digestion; any function of nutrition.

Word designating any person engaged in the preparation or sale of
foods.


68. PRIEST

Any religion or denomination.

Any article or act of religious ritual.

Any term of theology.

Word denoting or implying sanctity.

Word denoting or implying belief, disbelief, or doubt.

Word pertaining to church organization.

Proper name of any priest.

Any article of clerical attire.

Any profession more or less peculiarly masculine.


69. OCEAN

Any body of water.

Any plant or animal living in the ocean.

Any term of physical geography.

Any vessel or contrivance for navigation.

Word pertaining to navigation; any nautical term.

Common or proper name of any place bordering on the ocean.

Any aquatic feat of gymnastics.


70. HEAD

Any organization which has a person occupying the highest office.

Word denoting or implying the highest office of any organization.

Any intellectual faculty, quality, or operation.

Any part of the head.

Any pathological condition affecting the head.


71. STOVE

Any part of a stove.

Any kitchen utensil.

Any artificial heating apparatus; any fuel.

Any manner of cooking; any person engaged in cooking food.

Any article of household furniture.


72. LONG

Any word involving the concept of duration.

Word denoting shape, relative or absolute dimension, or distance.

Any object in which characteristically one dimension exceeds any
other.


73. RELIGION

Any religion or denomination; the name of any race or nation.

Any term of theology.

Any branch of metaphysical philosophy.


74. WHISKEY

Any beverage; the name of any brand of whiskey.

Any material of which whiskey is made.

Word denoting taste or flavor.

Any occasion or ceremony commonly associated with the use of alcoholic
beverages.

Word denoting a state of lowered consciousness.

Any physiological or pathological effect of alcohol; also any well
known, indirect effect.


75. CHILD

Word denoting or implying age of a person.

Word pertaining to familial relationships or domestic organization.

Name of any person.

Any part of a person's body.

Any article of a child's apparel.

Any common child's toy or game.

Word pertaining to educational organization.

Any word descriptive of the natural physical or mental make-up of a
child, or of the rate or degree of physical or mental development.

Word pertaining to any custom or ceremony connected with the birth or
rearing of children.

Any term of obstetrics.

Any word clearly related to the word Child used as a proper name.


76. BITTER

Any substance having a bitter, sour, sweet, or salt taste, or a
complex taste quality which may be characterized as strong.

Word denoting a taste or flavor quality.

Any organ of taste.

Any word in connection with which the word bitter may be used in the
sense of poignant.


77. HAMMER

Any tool or weapon.

Any trade involving the use of a hammer.


78. THIRSTY

Any beverage.

Any animal.

Word denoting taste or taste quality.

Any part of the upper end of the digestive tract.

Any drinking place; any container of a beverage.

Any fruit; any dessert.

Any food ingredient commonly known to excite thirst.


79. CITY

Name of any division of political geography.

Any architectural structure.

Any part of a city.

Word pertaining to the political organization of a city.


80. SQUARE

The name of any city.

The name of any square in a city or town.

Any geometrical figure or part of one.

Any object that is always or often square in shape.

Any device used in the arts for measuring angles, arcs, or distances
between points.

Any part of a carpenter's or draughtsman's square.

Any trade involving the use of the square.


81. BUTTER

Any article of food; any meal.

Any article of table linen, china, or silver; any cooking utensil.

Any process of cooking.


82. DOCTOR

The name of any physician.

Any medical speciality or practice.

Any medical or surgical procedure.

Any therapeutic remedy or method.

Any organization for the treatment of disease.

Name of any injury or disease.


83. LOUD

Any sound or sound quality.

Any part of the human vocal apparatus.

Any act of vocalization.

Any musical instrument.

Any apparatus for making sound signals.

Word denoting renown or commendation.


84. THIEF

Word denoting crime or wrongdoing.

Word denoting any circumstance propitious for theft.

Any common measure for the prevention or punishment of crime.

Any judicial, police, or penal authority.

Any readily portable article of value.

Word denoting renown.


85. LION

Word denoting or implying fear.

Any animal.


86. JOY

Word denoting a state, quality, faculty, or function of the mind.

Any common manifestation of emotion.

Any occasion, act, or means of recreation or of pleasurable excitement.


87. BED

Any article of bedding, bed linen, or night-clothes.

Any article of furniture.

Any living room, apartment, or building.

Any part of a room.

Any division of the diurnal cycle.

Any material of which beds are made.

Word pertaining to sleep or rest.


88. HEAVY

Word denoting or implying weight or lightness.

Any object or substance which characteristically possesses the quality
of either great weight or marked lightness.

Any means of support or suspension.

Any fabric; any article of clothing or bedding.

Word denoting something to be carried or transferred.

Any painful emotion.

Word denoting a state of lowered consciousness.


89. TOBACCO

The name of any brand or variety of tobacco.

Term denoting any common quality of tobacco.

Any physiological or pathological effect of tobacco.

Any word which expresses subjective characterization of tobacco.


90. BABY

Word denoting or implying age or size of a person.

Word pertaining to familial relationships or domestic organization.

Name of any person.

Any part of a person's body.

Any article of a child's apparel.

Any common child's toy or game.

Word pertaining to any custom or ceremony connected with the birth or
rearing of children.

Any term of obstetrics.


91. MOON

Any term of astronomy.

Word denoting or implying illumination or obscuration of light.

Any division of the diurnal cycle.


92. SCISSORS

Any operation or handicraft involving the use of scissors.

Any fabric; any article of clothing.

Any metal of which scissors are made.

Any tool for cutting, piercing, or sharpening.

Any operation of cutting, piercing, or sharpening.


93. QUIET

Any place where silence usually prevails or is enforced.

Word denoting or implying a state of lowered psychical activity or of
psychical inhibition.

Word denoting heightened psychical activity.

Any word pertaining to the emotions.


94. GREEN

Word which may be used to express subjective characterization of the
green color.

Any object or substance which is always or often green in color.

Anything which is by convention or common usage connected with the
green color.

Any color or coloring material.

Any plant, collection of plants, or part of a plant.

Any word clearly related to the word Green used as a proper name.


95. SALT

Any article of food that is usually seasoned with salt; any seasoning; any relish.

Any article of table linen, china, or silver.

Any process of cooking.

Any term of chemistry.


96. STREET

Name of any street or city.

Any part of a street.

Any building.

Any manner or means of locomotion commonly employed in traveling
through streets.


97. KING

Any name of the Deity.

The proper or common name of any ruler of a nation or of a smaller
municipality.

Any nation or country.

Any title of nobility.

Any word clearly related to the word King used as a proper name.


98. CHEESE

Any article of food; any meal.

Word denoting any variety of cheese.

Word pertaining to taste, flavor, or odor.

Word pertaining to appetite.

Any article of table linen, china, or silver.


99. BLOSSOM

Any plant, collection of plants, or part of a plant.

Any term of botany.

Any division of the annual cycle.


100. AFRAID

Any affective state; any common demonstration of emotion.

Any common object of fear.

Word denoting or implying danger, courage; any means of defense or
protection against danger.




