



          NEW YORK

           AT THE

LOUISIANA PURCHASE EXPOSITION

      ST. LOUIS, 1904


       REPORT OF THE

  NEW YORK STATE COMMISSION

  PREPARED AND COMPILED BY
     DELANCEY M. ELLIS

           1907


[ILLUSTRATION]




REPORT


ALBANY, N.Y., _March_ 25, 1907

Hon. CHARLES E. HUGHES, _Governor_:

DEAR SIR.--We beg to submit herewith, in accordance
with the provisions of the statute, the final report of the
Louisiana Purchase Exposition Commission of the State
of New York.

Very respectfully

EDWARD H. HARRIMAN
LOUIS STERN
EDWARD LYMAN BILL
WILLIAM BERRI
FREDERICK R. GREEN
LEWIS NIXON
JOHN C. WOODBURY
FRANK S. McGRAW
JOHN K. STEWART
JAMES H. CALLANAN
JOHN YOUNG
MRS. NORMAN E. MACK

CHARLES A. BALL

_Secretary and Chief Executive Officer_


[Transcriber's note: Certain cross-references originally appearing as
"See page N" have been changed to refer to chapter and section
instead.]





TABLE OF CONTENTS

Chapter

 1. Introduction and historical sketch

 2. Louisiana Purchase Exposition Commission, State of New York

 3. New York State Building

 4. Functions held in the New York State Building

 5. Dedication Day

 6. New York State Week

 7. Brooklyn Day

 8. Thanksgiving Day

 9. Educational exhibit and schedule of awards

10. Fine arts exhibit and schedule of awards

11. Agriculture and live stock exhibit and schedule of awards

12. Horticulture exhibit and schedule of awards

13. Forest, fish and game exhibit and schedule of awards

14. Mines and metallurgy exhibit and schedule of awards

15. Social economy exhibit and schedule of awards

16. Financial statement




Table of Full Page Illustrations
[this table did not appear in the original book]

Frontispiece: HONORABLE BENJAMIN B. ODELL, JR. GOVERNOR 1901-1904

Page
   8  FESTIVAL HALL AND GRAND BASIN
  15  EDWARD H. HARRIMAN, PRESIDENT, NEW YORK STATE COMMISSION
  25  WILLIAM BERRI, VICE PRESIDENT, NEW YORK STATE COMMISSION
  35  EDWARD LYMAN BILL, TREASURER, NEW YORK STATE COMMISSION
  45* LOUIS STERN, CHAIRMAN EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE, NEW YORK STATE
      COMMISSION
  50  UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT BUILDING
  59  NEW YORK STATE BUILDING
  71* JOHN K. STEWART, NEW YORK STATE COMMISSIONER
  80  NEW YORK STATE BUILDING, MAIN ENTRANCE
  87* JAMES H. CALLANAN, NEW YORK STATE COMMISSIONER
  95  NEW YORK STATE BUILDING, ASSEMBLY HALL
 104  APOTHESIS OF ST. LOUIS (NIEHAUS)
 109* LEWIS NIXON, NEW YORK STATE COMMISSIONER
 112  GERMAN PAVILION
 121  NEW YORK STATE BUILDING, ENTRANCE HALL
      (See section "THE ARCHITECTURE" in chapter III)
 126  EAST PAVILION AND CASCADE
 133* JOHN C. WOODBURY, NEW YORK STATE COMMISSIONER
 145* FREDERICK R. GREEN, NEW YORK STATE COMMISSIONER
 155* FRANK S. McGRAW, NEW YORK STATE COMMISSIONER
 162  PALACE OF LIBERAL ARTS
 171* JOHN YOUNG, NEW YORK STATE COMMISSIONER
 181  MRS. NORMAN E. MACK, NEW YORK STATE COMMISSIONER
 190  STATUE OF JOSEPH HENRY, ELECTRICIAN (FLANAGAN)
 195  CHARLES A. BALL, SECRETARY AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, NEW YORK
      STATE COMMISSION
 200  PALACE OF EDUCATION, WEST ENTRANCE
 207  EDUCATIONAL EXHIBIT
 215  EDUCATIONAL EXHIBIT, COMMON SCHOOL STATISTICS
 227  EDUCATIONAL EXHIBIT, FOURTH GRADE ALCOVE
 239  EDUCATIONAL EXHIBIT, TRADE SCHOOLS, SPECIAL SCHOOLS, BUSINESS
      EDUCATION ALCOVE
 250  "SHOOTING UP THE TOWN" (REMINGTON)
 257  FESTIVAL HALL AND CASCADE GARDENS
 267  DE LANCEY M. ELLIS, Director of Education and Social Economy
      CHARLES H. VICK, Superintendent of Horticulture
      CLARENCE LUCE, Architect
      J. H. DURKEE, Superintendent of Agriculture and Live Stock
      HARRY W. WATROUS, Chairman Committee on Art
 277  GRAND BASIN AND PALACE OF ELECTRICITY
 284  FLORAL CLOCK AND AGRICULTURAL BUILDING
 287  AGRICULTURE EXHIBIT, DISPLAY OF VEGETABLES
 301  AGRICULTURE EXHIBIT, DISPLAY OF SEEDS
 313  AGRICULTURE EXHIBIT
 325  NEW YORK CITY BUILDING (See chapter VI)
 337  EDUCATIONAL EXHIBIT, FROM ENTRANCE (See section "THE
      INSTALLATION" in chapter IX)
 349  LOUISIANA PURCHASE MONUMENT, PLAZA ST. LOUIS, AND VARIED
      INDUSTRIES BUILDING
 360  GRAND BASIN, BOAT LANDING
 365  HORTICULTURE EXHIBIT
 373  HORTICULTURE EXHIBIT, DISPLAY OF GRAPES
 385  HORTICULTURE EXHIBIT
 397  EXHIBIT OF STATE INSTITUTIONS FOR JUVENILE DELINQUENTS
      (see section "STATE BOARD OF CHARITIES" in chapter XV)
 409  EXHIBIT OF BERTILLON AND FINGER PRINT SYSTEMS OF IDENTIFICATION
      (see section "STATE DEPARTMENT OF PRISONS" in chapter XV)
 421  MINES AND METALLURGY EXHIBIT, SLATE MANTEL
      (see section "SLATE" in chapter XIV)
 427  FOREST, FISH AND GAME EXHIBIT, CAMP ADIRONDACK
 436  APPROACH TO WEST PAVILION
 445  FOREST, FISH AND GAME EXHIBIT, NATIVE BIRDS
 457  FOREST, FISH AND GAME EXHIBIT, CAMP ADIRONDACK, INTERIOR
      (see section "ATTRACTIVE FEATURES" in chapter XIII)
 470  PHYSICAL LIBERTY (MCNEIL)
 477  MAGNETIC SEPARATOR WORKING ON NEW YORK ORES
 487  MINES AND METALLURGY EXHIBIT
 495  MINES AND METALLURGY, LIBERAL ARTS, AND LAGOON
 500  MACHINERY BUILDING AND LAGOON
 507  ANCIENT AND MODERN METHODS OF CARING FOR THE INSANE
 515  EXHIBIT OF STATE DEPARTMENT OF PRISONS
      (see section "STATE DEPARTMENT OF PRISONS" in chapter XV)
 523  EXHIBIT OF STATE BOARD OF CHARITIES, CARE OF DESTITUTE ADULTS
      (see section "STATE BOARD OF CHARITIES" in chapter XV)
 528  ON THE PIKE
 535  EXHIBIT OF STATE COMMISSION IN LUNACY, HOSPITALS FOR THE INSANE
      (see section "STATE COMMISSION IN LUNACY" in chapter XV)

* These photographs are also labelled "Copyright 1903 [or 1904],
by Pirie MacDonald, Photographer of Men, N.Y."







CHAPTER I

Introduction and Historical Sketch


HISTORICAL SIGNIFICANCE

[ILLUSTRATION]

The Louisiana Purchase Exposition was held in the city of St. Louis in
1904, in commemoration of the acquisition in 1803 of the vast territory
west of the Mississippi, then called Louisiana. The transfer is
generally regarded as one of the most important events in our national
history and stands on record as the greatest acquisition of territory
ever made by peaceful methods. An American historian of great prominence
says: "The annexation of Louisiana was an event so portentous as to defy
measurement; it gave a new face to politics and ranked in historical
importance next to the Declaration of Independence and the adoption of
the Constitution."

The territory was ceded to France by Spain by the secret treaty of San
Ildefonso in 1800. This aroused to intense excitement the people of the
West, who were inclined to give credit to the rumor that the army of
forty thousand men sent by Napoleon (who was responsible for the
negotiation of that treaty) were in reality to take military possession
of Louisiana and the Floridas instead of to suppress the insurrection in
San Domingo, the ostensible object. France and England had been
struggling for many years for supremacy in the Western Continent, and in
the possession of this vast territory Napoleon foresaw a prosperous New
France. But there were many complications arising at home. Important
political questions demanded attention, and the great Napoleon soon
realized that he could not hope to cope successfully with the two great
problems lying at such a great distance apart.


NEGOTIATIONS FOR TRANSFER OF TERRITORY

At that time our country was interested in procuring possession of the
site of New Orleans and the free passage of the Mississippi river
forever for all American citizens, and negotiations were opened for
their purchase by Thomas Jefferson, author of the Declaration of
Independence, and at that time third President of the United States.

During the negotiations Napoleon suggested the transfer of the whole
Louisiana territory and the transaction was brought to a most successful
conclusion, the signers of the treaty being James Monroe, Robert R.
Livingston, and F.B. Marbois, the representative of Napoleon. It was a
significant bargain. By it Napoleon formed closer bonds of friendship
between France and the United States, and prevented any possibility of
the territory falling into the hands of Great Britain. He prophesied
that this Republic would eventually become a world power and a
commercial rival to England. How completely his prophecy was fulfilled.
Our country attained possession of a vast territory embracing more than
a million square miles, an area greater than the combined areas of the
British Isles, France, Germany, Spain, Belgium, the Netherlands and
Italy, the consideration being a figure less than that representing the
value of a single square block in any one of our great cities, or an
amount much smaller than has been yielded by any one of many mines
within the boundaries of the territory. Twelve flourishing states and
two territories have since been carved out of Louisiana, and the center
of our population is rapidly moving towards that region which was once
known as the wilderness of the West.


ROBERT R. LIVINGSTON

It is a matter of the utmost gratification that the State of New York
played so important a part in this great event in the person of Robert
R. Livingston, who was then United States Minister to France. Dr.
Livingston, the title of LL.D. having been conferred upon him by the
University of the State of New York, was one of the leading statesmen of
his day. A graduate of Kings (now Columbia) College, he began his career
in the practice of law in New York city, and was made Recorder of the
city in 1773. Elected to the Continental Congress in 1775, he was
appointed one of a committee of five to draft the Declaration of
Independence, but enforced absence from Philadelphia made it impossible
for him to sign the document. He was soon after elected Chancellor of
the State of New York, and as such administered the oath of office to
George Washington as first President of the United States. His previous
training in public affairs admirably fitted him for assuming the
important duties leading to the transfer of the Louisiana territory, and
to him as much as to any individual belongs the credit for the
successful consummation of the transaction.

At the Exposition a handsome statue of Livingston, by Lukemann, was
erected in the Cascade Gardens, on the approach to the West Pavilion.
Upon the front of the New York State Building appeared this legend:
"Robert R. Livingston of New York, Minister to France 1801-1805,
inaugurated the negotiations for the Louisiana Purchase and was the
first to sign the treaty."


ORIGIN OF THE EXPOSITION

The first action looking towards the commemoration of the Louisiana
Purchase was taken at a meeting of the Missouri Historical Society in
September, 1898, when a committee of fifty citizens was appointed to
take the preliminary steps looking to the observance of the occasion.
This committee recommended the submission of the question to a
convention of delegates, representing all the Louisiana Purchase states,
and at this convention, which was held at the Southern Hotel, St. Louis,
January 10, 1899, it was decided to hold a World's Fair as the most
fitting commemoration of the one hundredth anniversary of the
acquisition of the Louisiana territory. An executive committee, with the
Hon. David R. Francis as chairman, was appointed to carry out the
undertaking, and this committee determined that at least $15,000,000,
the amount paid to France for the territory, would be needed.


ACTION BY CONGRESS

Congress passed a bill in June, 1900, carrying a provisional
appropriation of $5,000,000, and pledging governmental support if the
city of St. Louis raised $10,000,000. The people went to work with a
will and had raised $5,000,000 by popular subscription early in January,
1901, and the following January thirtieth an ordinance was passed by the
St. Louis Municipal Assembly authorizing the issuance of $5,000,000 in
city bonds. On March twelfth President McKinley appointed a National
Commission of nine members, and in August issued a proclamation inviting
all the nations of the world to participate in the Exposition. Owing to
labor difficulties and delay in securing construction material it soon
became evident that it would be impossible to hold the fair during the
year 1903, as originally planned. Legislation being necessary in order
to provide for the necessary postponement, a bill was passed by Congress
and approved by President Roosevelt June 25, 1902, authorizing the
holding of the fair in 1904 instead of 1903, as originally determined.

Beginning with the basic appropriation of $15,000,000, [Footnote: In the
winter of 1904 a bill was passed by Congress authorizing a Government
loan of $4,600,000 to the Exposition Company, to be repaid in
instalments from the gate receipts.  The loan was entirely canceled
early in November, 1904.] as described above, to which had been added
$1,000,000 appropriated by the State of Missouri, the great enterprise
was projected on a $50,000,000 basis. It was planned to make the
universal Exposition at St. Louis the most comprehensive and wonderful
that the world had ever seen. How well its projectors succeeded is a
matter of recent history. How completely all previous expositions were
eclipsed has been told many times in picture and in print.


THE SITE

The site chosen for the Exposition included the western portion of
Forest Park, one of the finest parks in the United States. Its naturally
rolling ground afforded many opportunities for effective vistas, which
were quickly embraced by the Exposition Company's landscape artists.
Containing 1,240 acres, it was a tract approximately two miles long and
one mile wide.

The grounds might be said to have been divided into two general
sections, the dividing line being Skinker road. To the east was the main
picture, so called, which was formed by the grouping of eight
magnificent exhibit palaces around Festival Hall, the Colonnade of
States and Cascade Gardens.


THE MAIN PICTURE

Festival Hall stood upon a rise of ground well above the principal
exhibit palaces, and its majestic dome surmounted by a gilded figure of
"Victory," the first "Victory" to take the form of a man, was visible
from most any part of the grounds. The grouping of the exhibit palaces
was geometric in arrangement, in shape like an open fan, the ribs of the
fan being the waterways and plazas between which the exhibit palaces
were located.


THE ARCHITECTURE

The architecture, while varied and in some instances striking, was still
so modified as to make a most harmonious whole. For purity in
architecture the best example was the Palace of Education, which was
built on the lines of the Italian Renaissance. For most striking
architectural effects the Mines and Metallurgy building was invariably
pointed out. It was of composite architecture, comprising features of
the Egyptian, Byzantine and Greek. The stately obelisks which guarded
its entrance ways and the bas-relief panels which formed its outer
facade, were objects of universal interest.

To the southeast of the main group of buildings, and gracefully
clustered among the trees, were the state pavilions. Along the extreme
northern portion of the grounds for a mile stretched the amusement
highway, known as the Pike.


OTHER FEATURES

To the west of Skinker road were located the Administration buildings,
and, with one or two exceptions, the pavilions of foreign governments,
the Agriculture and Horticulture buildings, the Philippine Reservation
and the Department of Anthropology. The Intramural railroad, seven miles
in length, passed the principal points of interest and enabled visitors
to get about the grounds with speed and comfort.

To convert this great tract of land into a beautiful park with well-kept
roadways embellished with velvety lawns and magnificent flower beds,
would seem to be a task greater than man could perform within the short
space of time available for the completion of the Exposition. That it
was done, and well done, is a matter of history.


PROCESSES AS WELL AS PRODUCTS

It was early determined that the great Fair should be one of processes,
as well as of products; wherever possible there should be life and
motion; that the exhibits should answer the question, "How is it done?"
as well as "What is it?" The result was that the Exposition became a
constantly changing scene of moving objects and an educational force
many times greater than any of its predecessors. The student of
Mechanics, Electricity, Pedagogy, the Applied Arts, and other kindred
subjects could obtain here within a limited area valuable data, which
otherwise could only be collected at the expense of much time and
considerable money.


DEDICATION CEREMONIES

The formal dedication ceremonies covered three days, beginning April 30,
1903, the actual date of the Centennial Anniversary of the signing of
the treaty, and one year previous to the opening of the Exposition. Our
commonwealth was fittingly represented at that time, a special
appropriation of $50,000 for the same having been made by the
Legislature. Governor Odell and staff, State officers, a joint committee
from the Legislature and the members of the Louisiana Purchase
Exposition Commission attended. There were also present a provisional
regiment of infantry of the National Guard, under command of Colonel S.
M. Welch, N.G., N.Y.; a provisional division of the Naval Militia under
command of Lieutenant E.M. Harman, Second Battalion; and Squadron "A" of
New York, under command of Major Oliver H. Bridgman.


THE FIRST DAY'S PROGRAM

The program for the first day consisted of a grand military parade in
the morning and exercises in the Liberal Arts building at two o'clock in
the afternoon, followed by fireworks in the evening. The day was cold
and unpleasant, and a chill wind blowing from the north caused visitors
to seek comfort in heavy wraps.

The Governor of the State of New York and her troops met with a
continuous ovation along the line of march of the great military parade,
and from every side compliments and felicitations were bestowed upon the
State's representatives for so hearty and imposing a participation in an
event a thousand miles from home.

The occasion was graced by the presence of the President of the United
States, Theodore Roosevelt, and by ex-President Grover Cleveland, both
of whom made extended remarks at the afternoon exercises.


ADDRESS OF PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT.

The address of President Roosevelt was replete with historical allusions
and pointed epigrams. He drew many lessons from the valor and patriotism
of the early settlers of the west, and said, among other things:

"Courage and hardihood are indispensable virtues in a people; but the
people which possesses no others can never rise high in the scale either
of power or of culture. Great peoples must have in addition the
governmental capacity which comes only when individuals fully recognize
their duties to one another and to the whole body politic, and are able
to join together in feats of constructive statesmanship and of honest
and effective administration. ... We justly pride ourselves on our
marvelous material prosperity, and such prosperity must exist in order
to establish a foundation upon which a higher life can be built; but
unless we do in very fact build this higher life thereon, the material
prosperity itself will go for but very little. ... The old days were
great because the men who lived in them had mighty qualities; and we
must make the new days great by showing these same qualities. We must
insist upon courage and resolution, upon hardihood, tenacity, and
fertility of resource; we must insist upon the strong, virile virtues;
and we must insist no less upon the virtues of self-restraint,
self-mastery, regard for the rights of others; we must show our
abhorrence of cruelty, brutality, and corruption, in public and in
private life alike."


ADDRESS OF EX-PRESIDENT CLEVELAND

Ex President Cleveland delivered an eloquent panegyric and in closing
said:

"... We may well recall in these surroundings the wonderful measure of
prophecy's fulfillment, within the span of a short century, the spirit,
the patriotism and the civic virtue of Americans who lived a hundred
years ago, and God's overruling of the wrath of man, and his devious
ways for the blessing of our nation. We are all proud of our American
citizenship. Let us leave this place with this feeling stimulated by the
sentiments born of the occasion. Let us appreciate more keenly than ever
how vitally necessary it is to our country's wealth that every one
within its citizenship should be clean minded in political aim and
aspiration, sincere and honest in his conception of our country's
mission, and aroused to higher and more responsive patriotism by the
reflection that it is a solemn thing to belong to a people favored of
God."


THE SECOND DAY'S PROGRAM

The second day was designated "Diplomatic Day," and was devoted to a
luncheon to the visiting diplomats in the Administration Building,
followed by exercises in Festival Hall, at which time addresses were
made by Honorable John M. Thurston of the National Commission, who was
president of the day; Honorable David R. Francis, president of the
Exposition Company; M. Jean J. Jusserand, the French Ambassador, and
Senor Don Emilio de Ojeda, the Spanish Minister. In the evening a
brilliant reception was given to the Diplomatic Corps at the St. Louis
Club.


THE THIRD DAY'S PROGRAM

The third day, Saturday, May second, was officially designated "State
Day," and the exercises consisted of a huge civic parade, which consumed
two hours in passing a given point, and exercises at two o'clock in the
Liberal Arts building, over which ex-Senator William Lindsay of the
National Commission presided. Addresses were made by Governor Dockery,
who welcomed the governors and delegations from the various states and
by Governor Odell of New York, who responded. His brilliant address,
which was frequently punctuated by applause, follows:


ADDRESS OF GOVERNOR ODELL

"_Governor Dockery, Ladies and Gentlemen:_

"There is no phase of American history which should inspire us with
greater pride than the consummation of the purchase of the Louisiana
tract, an event which opened the pathway to the West, and made possible
the powerful nation to which we owe our allegiance. Trade, the
inspiration for travel, which brought about the discovery and
civilization of the Western Hemisphere, would have demanded inevitably
the cession to the United States of the vast regions beyond the
Mississippi. Except, however, for the peaceful and diplomatic measures
adopted through the wisdom of Thomas Jefferson, this territory could
only have been acquired by the sacrifice of human life and the
expenditure of untold treasure. That Robert Livingston, a citizen of the
Empire State, became the ambassador of the great commoner at the court
of France and that it was due to his skill and intelligence that
Napoleon was brought to an understanding of the conditions as they
existed and of the determination of our then young Republic to prevent
the building up of foreign colonies at our very threshold, is a cause
for congratulation to the people of the State I represent, and renders
the duty which has been assigned to me, therefore, doubly pleasant.
Memorable as was this event, and of great importance to the future
growth of the Republic, it left its imprint not only upon America, but
upon Europe as well. Through it the Napoleonic ambition to develop a
vast plan of colonization which threatened the peace of the world was
thwarted. The dismemberment of the French possessions which soon
followed resulted in the grouping together of the various states of
Europe into vast empires whose relations with our country are such that
encroachment or territorial aggrandizement upon this hemisphere are
forever impossible. Spain, whose waning power was then apparent, was no
longer a menace, and thus rendered possible the acquisition of the
remaining stretch of territory which made our possessions secure from
the Gulf to the Canadian line. While, therefore, as Americans we are
prone to the belief that if the necessity had arisen we should have been
able to wrest this rich and fertile territory from even the strongest
hands, it is well for us to understand, however, that even the diplomacy
of which we boast would have been futile except for the failure of
Napoleon in San Domingo and his pressing need of funds to permit him to
face the enemies of the French. 'Westward Ho!' was the cry of the Old
World. From the time when the genius of Columbus accepted the theories
of the earlier astronomers the imagination and cupidity of adventurous
spirits had been excited by tales of 'far off Cathay.' One hundred years
ago the protocol for this territory was signed; one hundred years of
history has been written; a nation of three millions has expanded into
an empire of eighty millions of souls. Our country has not only become a
power among the nations of the world, but has taken an advanced position
in the progress and work of civilization. A westward passage to India
was sought by Columbus and was still the aim of La Salle in his
adventurous voyage along the mighty Mississippi. To-day the American
flag floats at the very gates of China, and almost in sight of its
walls, placed there by American valor and by American arms in a struggle
for human rights, and liberty. Trackless forests and undulating prairies
have become the highways for the speeding engines bearing the burdens of
traffic to the Orient. No longer are they the pasturage for the buffalo,
but the source of food supply for the whole world. Treasures of untold
value have been laid bare by the ingenuity of man, but far beyond this
wealth are the products in grain and lowing kine which add their
hundreds of millions to the resources of our country, extending even
beyond the dreams or the imagination of those who sought only the
precious metals with which to return with a competence to their native
land.

"This is but the span of a century and to commemorate its glories we
come from the eastern section, from the earlier colonies to congratulate
the people of the West upon the results which we as a nation have
achieved. So few the years, yet how notable the history. Upon this soil
began those battles which ended in the emancipation of the slave. From
this border, and almost from within this territory, came the great
Emancipator, a man who struggled with the vicissitudes of fortune in
early life, who aided in developing the great West, and whose name will
be forever enshrined as the one who in his act as chief magistrate of
this country removed the stain which the earlier Dutch had fastened upon
our body politic like a 'festering sore.' The past, with all of its
achievements, with all of its successes, is to us but an incentive and
guide for the future progress of our country. America still beckons to
the oppressed of all lands and holds out the gifts of freedom, and we at
this time, and upon this occasion, should renew our adherence to those
policies which have made us great as a nation. The future is before us,
and the patriotism and self-sacrifice of those who made the country's
history so glorious should be an inspiration to us all for higher ideals
of citizenship. Through the golden gates of commerce pours an unceasing
stream of immigration, which must be amalgamated with American ideas and
American principles. From the earlier settlers has come a blending of
the vigor of the Anglo-Saxon with the Teutonic and Latin races,
resulting in that composite type which we are wont to recognize and
regard as the type of the true American. Aside from the commercial and
industrial results which followed the acquisition of this vast and
fertile territory, and the building up of the large marts and towns
which everywhere blend with its magnificent scenery, the definition of
the power and extent of our Constitution was most important. At its
inception, coming at a time when the framers of the Constitution were
not only able to interpret their work, but to give to it their moral
force and support, it was demonstrated that no constitutional
limitations should retard the onward growth, the onward rush of American
civilization, until it should have reached the farthermost bounds of the
far-off Pacific. The barriers to human progress were by this
interpretation removed and ranges of new States have given effect to the
democratic principles of our great Republic, and have made of our
country a Union--not of weak, impotent States--but a commonwealth of
nations, bound to each other through a centralized government by ties of
allegiance, common interest and patriotism, where freemen rule and where
suffrage is more esteemed than wealth.

"These rights and their protection should receive our earnest thought.
The battles of the past have been for freedom and liberty, and the
struggles of the future will be for their preservation, not, however, by
force of arms, but through the peaceful methods which come through the
education of our people. The declaration which brought our Republic into
existence has insured and guaranteed that liberty of conscience and that
freedom of action which does not interfere with the prerogatives or
privileges of a man's neighbors. Capital and labor are the two great
elements upon which the prosperity and happiness of our people rest, and
when, therefore, aggregations of the one are met by combinations of the
other, it should be the aim of all to prevent the clashing of these
great interests. The products of toil are worthless unless there be some
means by which they can be substituted or transferred for that which
labor requires. The concrete form in which these transactions are
conducted is the money power or the capital of the land. Without work
all of these fertile fields, these teeming towns, would have been
impossible, and without a desire to benefit and elevate humanity, its
onward progress would have been useless. To work, to labor, is man's
bounden duty, and in the performance of the tasks which have been placed
upon him, he should be encouraged, and his greatest incentive should be
the knowledge that he may transmit to his children and his children's
children a higher civilization and greater advantages than he himself
possessed. Trade conditions which would permit to the toiler but a bare
sustenance, the bare means of a livelihood, would be a hindrance to
human progress, a hindrance not to be removed by all of the maxims of
the philosopher or the theories of the doctrinaire. Promise without
fulfillment is barren, but when you can place before the mechanic the
assured fact that the performance of his duty means success in life, and
that his non-performance means failure; when you can show him that this
law is immutable, you have made of him a useful citizen and have
instilled into his mind a firm belief that the freedom and liberty of
which we boast is not an inchoate substance to be dreamed of and not
enjoyed. But this desired result cannot be secured if combinations of
capital, which produce the necessaries of life cheaper and better, are
assailed as the enemies of mankind. There is always a mean between those
who seek only a fair recompense and return for that which they produce,
and those who seek undue advantages for the few at the expense of the
many. The laws which have been enacted, if properly executed, are
sufficient in their force and effect to encourage the one and to punish
the other, but in our condemnation let us not forget that with the
expansion that has come to our country, an expansion of our business
relations is also necessary. This growth has brought us into intimate
contact with the markets of the world, and in the struggle that is
always before us, the competition of trade, if we are to hold our own
among the world's producers, we should encourage and not hinder those
who by their energy, their capital and their labor have banded together
for the purpose of meeting these new conditions--problems which our
individual efforts alone cannot solve, but which require the
concentrated force and genius of both capital and labor. Incentive for
good citizenship would indeed be lacking if there were taken from us the
opportunities for development, the opportunities for the young man to
follow in the footsteps of those who have written their names in the
history of our country as the great captains of industry. Success will
always follow perseverance and genius. Every heresy, every doctrine
which would teach the young man of this country differently, is an
insult to the intelligence of our people, and is in the direction of
building up a dangerous element in American society which in time would
threaten not only the peace and prosperity we enjoy, but our very
institutions themselves. When you have placed before the young man all
of his possibilities, you have made it impossible to make of our
Republic a plutocracy controlled by the few at the expense of the many.
The individual should count for as much as the aggregation of
individuals, because an injury to the one will lead to the destruction
of the many. The question of adjusting and harmonizing the relations of
capital and labor is the problem before us to-day and is one which will
become more urgent in the future. Its solution must be along those lines
of constitutional right which every citizen has been guaranteed. Every
man is entitled in the prosecution of his work to the broadest possible
liberty of action and the protection of law, of that law which is the
outgrowth of necessity and which seeks to encourage and not to oppress.
Such recognition can always be secured if there is a determination upon
the part of those charged with the responsibility of government to have
it. And who is not? Every man possessed of a ballot is responsible and
has the power, not only to formulate but to criticise and to punish as
well. If this right be properly exercised, an honest and efficient
administration of our affairs can always be secured. To aid in this work
we have given to the press the broadest possible liberty, a freedom
which, however, should never be abused. It should never be used as the
medium for the circulation of charges or of calumnies which are without
foundation, and which please but the fancies of those in whose minds
there always exists envy and discontent. Such a misuse of privileges
should be condemned by all right-minded citizens. In its virtuous
indignation with those who abuse public place and power, it should be
careful to do exact justice because in our busy and active lives we have
come to depend to a very great extent upon the wisdom and the honesty of
these who edit our newspapers for the information rightly to judge of
the conditions, events and necessities of our country. By means of the
press, and with an intelligent citizenship, we may always feel sure that
there will come into our public life influences for good which will
render our government more stable, will add to its renown and to its
glory and will insure for all the perpetuation of those principles which
have come down to us through the wisdom of our forefathers and which
have been amplified by the knowledge of succeeding generations.

"The greatest solvent for political heresies, for doctrines which are
antagonistic to popular government, is education. To the educated mind
there comes a conception of duty which is not possible to the ignorant.
The great colleges and schools with which we are blessed are performing
a vital work, and these institutions for developing a higher order of
citizenship are of far more worth and of greater importance than all of
the ships of war or the arms of the nation in maintaining and upholding
those policies which have been adopted for our protection against
foreign and domestic foes. But it is not alone a theoretical education
which is necessary for this higher citizenship. It must be linked with
the knowledge which comes of the study of the character, of the manner
and methods of other nations than our own, which leads the artisan to
inspect and to improve upon the ingenuity of his fellows of other lands.
It is this feature in the exposition which is to take place upon this
ground next year that is particularly significant and important in the
solution of the problems to which I have referred. It is the contact,
the friendly rivalry thus created, which brings about a betterment and
improvement of conditions. It is appropriate, therefore, that at the one
hundredth anniversary of this great event of our nation's history, we
should gather here all of the ingenuity and the genius of the past and
the present, that we may contrast and make note of our progress. This
will be an inspiration for us in the performance of our duty, and will
add to our affection for our native and adopted land, and thus make of
America a still greater power for good. A patriotic people is possible
only when there exists a love of country which has been inspired by the
stories of the past. It is the stories of the glorious past which
encourage us to grapple with the problems of the present and to look
with disdain upon those who fail to solve them. What fills our mind with
more gratitude; what inspires us with greater heroism; what instills
more patriotism than the struggles of the early colonial wars? The
Anglo-Saxon energy which swept from this continent the dominion of those
who sought only wealth, and which substituted the thrift of the voyagers
of the _Mayflower_ and of the settlers of Jamestown--which Speaks
of the battles with the Indians, which tells of the glories not only of
victories but of the defeats of the heroes of the Revolution--all are
incentives for purer and better citizenship. And so, too, as we recall
the struggles to the death of the descendants of these earlier settlers
in the greatest civil war that the world has ever known, let us to-day,
both in charity and in patriotism, remember them all as heroes. While we
may differ as to the principles for which they fought, there is no
conflict of opinion, no divergence in thought, which bids us to-day to
withhold our admiration for all those who took part in that great
struggle. It was but a page in our nation's history, but a page shaded
by human blood. It was but the working out the will of Divine
Providence, so that from its baptism of blood our republic might emerge
greater, stronger and more powerful than ever before, that there might
thereafter be no sectional hate, no dividing line in the patriotism of
our people. This it is which should inspire us to-day. More progress, a
further advance in civilization, the extending of a helping hand to the
afflicted and the welcoming word to the oppressed, should be concrete
evidence of America's greatness and of the devotion of her people. Then
it will be that our flag, now honored and respected, honored because of
the power and the intelligence of our people, will take on additional
lustre and additional significance as that of a nation that has accepted
its duty to protect humanity at home and abroad, and to stand as the
pacificator and preserver of the peace of the world."

At the conclusion of the afternoon exercises Governor Odell reviewed the
New York State troops on the plaza in Forest Park. The review was held
in the presence of a large assemblage and was an inspiring sight.


OPENING DAY

One year later, on April 30, 1904, the Exposition was formally opened to
the public; elaborate exercises being held at eleven o'clock at the foot
of the Louisiana Purchase Monument on the Plaza St. Louis. There were
present a distinguished assemblage, including a delegation of the Senate
and the House of Representatives, the National Commission, the Board of
Lady Managers, representatives of foreign governments, Governors of
States and their staffs, State Commissions, United States Government
Board, Exposition officials, and others. The exercises were opened by a
prayer by Rev. Frank W. Gunsaulus of Chicago, which was followed by an
address by President Francis. The Treasurer of the Exposition, William
H. Thompson, as chairman of the committee on grounds and buildings,
introduced Isaac S. Taylor, who delivered the gold key to the buildings
to President Francis and presented diplomas to his staff. An address
followed by Director of Exhibits F.J.V. Skiff, who presented commissions
to his staff, the chiefs of the various exhibit departments. Next
followed addresses in behalf of the city of St. Louis by Hon. Rolla
Wells, Mayor; in behalf of the National Commission by Hon. Thomas H.
Carter, its President; in behalf of the United States Senate by Senator
Henry E. Burnham; in behalf of the House of Representatives by Hon.
James A. Tawney. New York State was especially honored in the selection
of the president of her commission to speak in behalf of the domestic
exhibitors. Hon. Edward H. Harriman was then introduced by President
Francis.


ADDRESS OF PRESIDENT HARRIMAN

After briefly complimenting the President and Directors of the
Exposition, Mr. Harriman said:

"Our 'Domestic Exhibitors' could have no higher testimonial than that
furnished by the magnificent buildings and grounds of this Exposition.
We have here combined in brilliant variety the charms and beauties of
garden, forest, lake and stream, embellished by these splendid
structures, forming an harmonious whole certainly not equaled by any
former Exposition. All credit is due the President and Directors, whose
intelligence and untiring labors have conquered all obstacles and
brought this World's Fair to a most auspicious and successful opening.
One cannot view the result of their labors without being deeply
impressed with the magnitude of their undertaking, and when we consider
the exhibits which have been assembled within these grounds, we are led
irresistibly to an appreciation of the multitude of forces which
contributed to this great work, and particularly to the co-operation
which must have existed to produce the result before us.

"I have the honor on this occasion to speak for our 'Domestic
Exhibitors.' They are well represented by their works before you, and by
these works you can know them.

"These exhibits represent in concrete form the artistic and industrial
development of this country, and in viewing them one cannot but be
impressed with the great improvement in the conditions affecting our
material and physical welfare and with the corresponding advancement in
our intellectual and esthetic life.

"Let us consider for a moment the processes by which this result has
been reached. We have here collected the products of our artistic,
scientific and industrial life. The raw materials of the farm, the
vineyard, the mine and the forest have been transformed by the skilled
artisan, the artist and the architect into the finished products before
you. By the co-operation of all these resources, of all these
activities, of all these workers, this result has been accomplished.
From the felling of the trees in the forest, the tilling of the soil and
the mining of the ore, through all the steps and processes required to
produce from the raw material the complicated machine or the costly
fabric, there must have been co-operation, and all incongruous elements
and resistant forces must have been eliminated or overcome.

"The chief factor, therefore, which has contributed to these results is
the co-operation of all our people. The first law of our civilization is
the co-operation of all individuals to improve the conditions of life.
By division of labor each individual is assigned to or takes his special
part in our social organization. This specialization of labor has become
most minute. Not only is this true in scientific and philosophic
research, in professional and business life, but in the simplest and
earliest occupations of men, such as the tilling of the soil, the
specialist is found bringing to the aid of his industry expert and
scientific knowledge.

"... In the division of labor and the resultant specialization of human
activity we have necessarily different classes of workers, some of whom
have adopted the co-operative idea by forming organizations by which
they seek to better their conditions. No doubt each class of workers has
its particular interests which may be legitimately improved by
co-operation among its members, and thus far the labor organization has
a lawful purpose, but while standing for its rights it cannot
legitimately deny to any other class its rights, nor should it go to the
extent of infringing the personal and inalienable rights of its members
as individuals. On the contrary, it must accord to its own members and
to others the same measure of justice that it demands for itself as an
organization.

"In working out this problem there has been much conflict. Indeed,
according to human experience, such conflict could not entirely be
avoided, but in the end each class must recognize that it cannot exist
independently of others; it cannot strike down or defeat the rights or
interests of others without injuring itself. Should capital demand more
than its due, by that demand it limits its opportunities, and,
correspondingly, the laborer who demands more than his due thereby takes
away from himself the opportunity to labor. No one can escape this law
of co-operation. Self-interest demands that we must observe its just
limitations. We must be ready to do our part and accord to all others
the fair opportunity of doing their part. We must co-operate with and
help our colaborer. We should approach the solution of each question
which may arise with a reasonable and, better still, a friendly spirit.
He who obstructs the reasonable adjustment of these questions, who
fosters strife by appealing to class prejudice, may justly be regarded
by all as an enemy to the best public interests....

"In conclusion, permit me to advert to the Louisiana Purchase, which we
are now celebrating, and call attention to the importance of that event
in securing to our people the fullest benefit of the co-operative idea.
Manifestly, if our Government were restricted to the original territory
of the United States, as defined by the Treaty of 1783, we must have
encountered in many ways the opposition of governments, some of them
European, which would have occupied the territory beyond our original
south and west boundaries. Our trade and commerce moving from or to our
original territory would, necessarily, have been largely restricted by
hostile foreign powers. The Louisiana Purchase not only more than
doubled our territory by adding a country rich in material resources,
but gave us control of the Mississippi river, and made possible the
acquisition of the Oregon Territory, the Mexican cessions and the
annexation of Texas. ...

"Though much has been done towards the development of this imperial
domain, yet we may truly say that we have only seen the beginning of
that development. The possibilities for the future are boundless. With a
land of unparalleled resources, occupied by a people combining the best
elements of our modern civilization and governed by laws evolved from
the highest and best progress of the human race, no eye can foresee the
goal to which a co-operation of all these forces must lead."

The Mexican Commissioner, A. R. Nuncio, spoke in behalf of the foreign
exhibitors. The concluding address was made by Hon. William H. Taft,
Secretary of War, who attended as the special representative of the
President. At its conclusion the President of the United States, in the
White House at Washington, pressed a key that started the machinery,
unfurled the flags, set the cascades in motion, and thus opened the
Exposition.


BENEFICENT RESULTS

To the question "Was the Louisiana Purchase Exposition a success?" the
answer must be an unqualified affirmative. The value of any great
exposition cannot be measured in dollars and cents any more than it can
be measured in pounds and ounces. The great Fair at St. Louis was not
projected as a money-making undertaking. It was held to commemorate a
great event in American history and was designed to arouse a popular
interest in the story of the acquisition of the Louisiana Territory and
its glorious results; to more closely knit together the peoples of the
earth in good fellowship and brotherly love; to give to all nations an
opportunity to demonstrate to each other their progress in material
things; to awaken in the American people a sense of civic pride and a
determined resolution to maintain and advance the prestige which they
now enjoy among the nations of the earth. Having fulfilled all this, who
shall say that the Exposition has been a failure?


FAIR OFFICIALS FROM NEW YORK

The State of New York has every reason to be proud of her connection
with the great Fair, not only in her official participation, which
through the generous action and hearty support of the Executive and the
Legislature was on a most liberal and comprehensive scale, but many of
her sons were prominent in its building, in the creation of its artistic
effects, and no less in the administration of its various departments.
At the very inception of the work New York was honored in the
appointment of Martin H. Glynn, of Albany, N. Y., as a member of the
National Commission. Mr. Glynn was afterwards elected Vice-Chairman of
the Commission and was one of its most active members. Laurence H.
Grahame, of New York city, was Secretary of the National Commission. His
genial personality, his wide acquaintance and his long experience in
newspaper work admirably fitted him for the duties of the position,
which he performed with fidelity. Mrs. Daniel Manning, of Albany, was
President of the Board of Lady Managers. The position was one requiring
marked executive ability, dignity and tact. Mrs. Manning performed the
arduous duties falling to her lot with a grace and cordiality which won
for her the love and esteem of the official delegates to the Exposition
from throughout the world. She was signally honored on many occasions
and is one of New York's most distinguished daughters. Judge Franklin
Ferriss, the general counsel for the Exposition Company, and one of St.
Louis' most eminent lawyers, went forth from our State many years ago to
seek and find his fortune in the West.


CHIEFS OF EXHIBIT DEPARTMENTS

Of the thirteen chiefs of departments in the division of exhibits New
York lays claim to six. The Department of Education and Social Economy,
as well as the Department of Congresses, was under the direction of Dr.
Howard J. Rogers, now Assistant Commissioner of Education of the State
of New York, and formerly Deputy Superintendent of Public Instruction;
also United States Director of Education and Social Economy at the Paris
Exposition in 1900.

Milan H. Hulbert had charge of the great Department of Manufactures and
Varied Industries. Mr. Hulbert is a native of Brooklyn and a graduate of
the Brooklyn Polytechnic Institute. He was in charge of the Department
of Varied Industries for the United States Commission to Paris in 1900.
The Art Department was presided over by Professor Halsey C. Ives, now of
St. Louis, but formerly of New York State. The old school house in which
he received the ground work of his education still stands at Montour
Falls, Schuyler county. Professor Ives was also Chief of Arts at the
Columbian Exposition in 1893. The Chief of the Department of Machinery,
Thomas M. Moore, is a native, and has always been a resident, of New
York city. He was in charge of the Departments of Machinery,
Transportation, Agricultural Implements, Graphic Arts and Ordnance at
the Pan American Exposition in Buffalo.

Of late years Dr. Tarleton H. Bean, Chief of the Forest, Fish and Game
Department, has been a resident of New York State. In 1895 he became the
director of the Aquarium in New York city and rebuilt that
establishment. He was Chief of the Department of Forestry and Fisheries
for the United States at the Paris Exposition in 1900.

The Chief of the Department of Physical Culture, James E. Sullivan, has
always been a New Yorker. He is an acknowledged athletic record
authority and editor of the official athletic almanac. He was in charge
of the American contingent that competed in the Olympic games at the
Paris Exposition, and was also director of athletics at the Pan American
Exposition.


SCULPTORS

The heroic equestrian statue "The Apotheosis of St. Louis," generally
considered one of the finest works of its kind, which stood at the very
gateway to the Fair grounds, symbolizing the cordial welcome extended by
the city to her guests from every part of the world, was the work of
Charles H. Niehaus, of New York city. The sculpture of the Louisiana
Purchase monument, the surmounting figure typifying "Peace" and the base
decoration of groups representing scenes connected with the purchase,
was by Karl Bitter, chief of sculpture of the Exposition, another New
Yorker. Just in front of the monument and looking upon the grand basin
were four groups portraying frontier life, entitled "The Buffalo Dance",
"A Step to Civilization", "Peril of the Plains", and "A Cowboy at Rest",
all being the work of Solon Borglum, another New Yorker. The crowning
artistic and architectural effects of the whole Fair were embraced in
Festival Hall and the Cascades. These were the work of two New York men,
Cass Gilbert and Emanuel S. Masqueray. Mr. Gilbert was the architect of
Festival Hall and Mr. Masqueray designed the Cascades and the Colonnade
of States. Mr. Masqueray had other notable pieces of work in evidence
about the grounds.

The Palace of Manufactures, standing just to the east of the Plaza St.
Louis, was the work of Messrs. Carrere and Hastings, also New Yorkers.
It was regarded as one of the most successful structures upon the
grounds from an architect's point of view and it was appropriate that to
New York men should have been intrusted the construction of the building
in which exhibits of manufactures were displayed, in view of the
pre-eminence of our State from a manufacturing and commercial
standpoint.

And so throughout all the departments of the great Fair and throughout
the season, one constantly encountered those who by some tie were bound
to New York. Many of her sons who had gone forth in their youth came
back and called at the New York State building and recalled some
pleasant incident of the old days or made grateful acknowledgment of
some benefit which had come to them from their native state. One of the
most delightful features of all the experiences of those who had the
honor officially to represent the Empire State at St. Louis was the
meeting of the sons and daughters who had long since left home.


CONCLUSION

The gates had scarcely closed for the last time when the work of
destruction and demolition began. All of the beauties of the dream city
which for seven months had been the admiration of thousands and an
inspiration to all to do higher and better things, were swept away
almost in a night and soon the whole scene will be restored to a park.
To those who had come to love its majestic structures, its placid
waterways, its attractive vistas and its fairy like illumination, comes
a pang of regret tempered with the feeling of gratefulness that it ever
existed and that it was their privilege to witness it secure in the
knowledge that it shall always be theirs to remember and to dream of.
Most effectually was the whole story told in an address on Chicago Day,
by Ernest McGaphey, a poet from that city.

"In its truest sense this Exposition is epic and dramatic. The mere
prose of it will come to lie neglected on the dusty shelves of
statisticians, but its poetry will be a priceless legacy to generations
that will follow. And thus there is one light only which may not fade
from the windows of Time--one glint to illuminate the flight of the
dying years--that gleam which lives in fancy and in memory.

"And when this vision of magic departs; when the ivory towers have
vanished, and the sound of flowing waters has been stilled, there will
exist with us yet the recollection of it all. And so at the end the most
enduring fabric known to man is woven of the warp and woof of dreams.
The canvas of the great painters will crumble, the curves of noble
statuary be ground into dust by Time, and all this pageantry of art and
commerce disappear. But memory will keep a record of these days as a
woman will treasure old love letters, and in the last analysis the
height and breadth, the depth and scope of this splendid achievement
shall be measured by a dream."



CHAPTER II

The Louisiana Purchase Exposition Commission, State of New York

[ILLUSTRATION]


The first steps looking toward the official participation of the State
of New York in the Louisiana Purchase Exposition were taken by the
Legislature of 1902, which passed the following act, receiving executive
approval on April 7, 1902:

CHAPTER 421, LAWS OF 1902

An Act to provide for the representation of the state of New York at the
Louisiana purchase exposition at Saint Louis, Missouri, and making an
appropriation therefor.

Became a law, April 7, 1902, with the approval of the Governor. Passed,
three-fifths being present.

_The People of the State of New York, represented in Senate and
Assembly, do enact as follows:_

SECTION 1. The governor is hereby authorized to appoint twelve
commissioners to represent the state of New York at the Louisiana
purchase exposition to be held at Saint Louis, Missouri, beginning on
the first day of May, nineteen hundred and three, and ending on the
thirtieth day of November, nineteen hundred and three, and for the
purposes of this act such commissioners shall be known as the "Louisiana
purchase exposition commission." Such commission shall encourage and
promote a full and complete exhibit of the commercial, educational,
industrial, artistic and other interests of the state and its citizens
at such exposition, and shall provide, furnish and maintain, during the
exposition, a building or room for a state exhibit and for the official
headquarters of the state, and for the comfort and convenience of its
citizens and its exhibitors.

2. The members of the commission shall receive no compensation for their
services, but shall be entitled to the actual necessary expenses
incurred while in discharge of duties imposed upon them by the
commission. Such commission may provide a secretary whose compensation,
to be fixed by it, shall be at the rate of not to exceed twenty-five
hundred dollars a year for all services to be performed in carrying out
the provisions of this act, and may also provide such other clerical
assistance and office facilities as it deems necessary, but no salaries
or expenses shall be incurred for a longer period than ninety days after
the close of the exposition.

3. The sum of one hundred thousand dollars, or so much thereof as may be
necessary, is hereby appropriated out of any moneys in the treasury not
otherwise appropriated for the purposes of this act. Such money shall be
paid by the treasurer on the warrant of the comptroller issued upon a
requisition signed by the president and secretary of the commission,
accompanied by an estimate of the expenses for the payment of which the
money so drawn is to be applied. Within ninety days after the close of
the exposition, such commission shall make a verified report to the
comptroller of the disbursements made by it, and shall return to the
state treasury the unexpended balance of money drawn in pursuance of
this act. No indebtedness nor obligation shall be incurred under this
act in excess of the appropriation herein made.

4. The commission shall, as requested by the governor, from time to
time, render to him reports of its proceedings.

5. This act shall take effect immediately.


THE COMMISSION

Pursuant to the provisions of this act, Governor Odell named as the
twelve members of the Commission: Edward H. Harriman, of New York city;
Louis Stern, of New York city; Edward Lyman Bill, of New York city;
William Berri, of Brooklyn; Cyrus E. Jones, of Jamestown; Lewis Nixon,
of New York city; John C. Woodbury, of Rochester; Frank S. McGraw, of
Buffalo; John K. Stewart, of Amsterdam; James H. Callanan, of
Schenectady; John Young, of Geneseo; and Mrs. Norman E Mack, of Buffalo.

A few months after the appointment of the Commission, Cyrus E. Jones, of
Jamestown, resigned, and the Governor named Frederick R. Green, of
Fredonia, in his place.

The results accomplished by the Commission as attested by the number of
awards received in all of the exhibit departments; in the beauty and
utility of the State building; in the careful procedure as to the
expenditure of State funds, all bear testimony to the wisdom of the
Chief Executive in the appointment of a Commission, all of the members
of which were of acknowledged prominence either in professional,
business or social life.

Throughout its entire existence the Commission worked with a singular
unanimity and with a hearty interest but seldom found in commissions of
this character. It held twenty-five regular meetings and two special
meetings, the aggregate of attendance at all meetings being two hundred
thirty-one, making an average attendance of eight and fifty-nine
hundredths at each meeting. When it is considered that each member had
large personal interests, and that he served the State absolutely
without compensation, only necessary expenses being allowed by statute,
and that a majority of the members of the Commission were obliged to
travel from 160 to 450 miles to attend the meetings, its record for
faithfulness to duty as shown by the above figures is one in which it
may take a pardonable pride.


THE ORGANIZATION OF THE COMMISSION

By virtue of being first named by the Governor, Edward H. Harriman, of
New York city, became President of the Commission, which completed its
organization as follows: Vice-President, William Berri; Treasurer,
Edward Lyman Bill. Executive Committee: Louis Stern, Chairman; William
Berri, Lewis Nixon, John K. Stewart and James H. Callanan. Auditing
Committee: James H. Callanan and John K. Stewart.

There was but one name presented for Secretary of the Commission, that
of Mr. Charles A. Ball, of Wellsville. He was unanimously elected, with
compensation of $2,500 per annum, the appointment taking effect December
8, 1902. In its choice of this officer the Commission was most
fortunate. Efficient, faithful and courteous and with a wide circle of
acquaintances, particularly among the prominent men of the Empire State,
Mr. Ball was peculiarly qualified for the duties of the position. He was
popular with his superiors and his subordinates, and so directed the
work of the several departments within the Commission's jurisdiction as
to procure the very best results.

Anthony Pfau was later appointed bookkeeper and assistant to the
Secretary, and in the handling of a vast amount of detail work displayed
commendable skill and patience. Seward H. French, stenographer to the
Secretary, was always at his post of duty and cheerfully and faithfully
served the Commission at all times. Herman Kandt, assistant bookkeeper,
completed the office force.

An informal meeting was held in September, 1902, shortly after the names
of the Commission were announced by the Governor. At this meeting an
invitation was extended on behalf of the Louisiana Purchase Exposition
Company to attend the ceremonies in connection with the allotment of
sites for the various State buildings. The President appointed
Commissioners Stewart, Woodbury and Callanan a committee to represent
the Commission on that occasion, and on behalf of the State of New York,
to accept the site for its building. The ceremonies in connection with
this occasion are described elsewhere. The first formal meeting of the
Commission was called on December 3, 1902, at 120 Broadway, New York
city.

At this meeting the Commission determined to maintain offices at 120
Broadway, New York city, until such time as the New York State building
was opened at St. Louis, and for the expedition of business the
following by-laws were provided:


BY-LAWS

_First_. The officers of the Louisiana Purchase Exposition
Commission of the State of New York shall consist of a President,
Vice-President, Treasurer and Secretary.

_Second_. Regular meetings of the Commission shall be held in the
rooms of the Commission in New York city on the second Wednesday of
every month, at two o'clock P. M., and all members shall be notified by
the Secretary one week in advance of such meeting.

_Third_. Three members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum
at all regular meetings.

_Fourth_. An Executive Committee of five members, appointed by the
Commission, shall choose one of their number for Chairman, who shall act
also as Chairman at the meetings of the Commission in the absence of the
President or Vice-President. The Executive Committee shall meet at least
once a month, and shall report at the regular meetings of the
Commission. Three members of the Executive Committee shall form a quorum
for the transaction of business.

_Fifth_. Any three members of the Commission may call for a special
meeting, through the Secretary, of the entire Commission, at any time,
by giving one week's notice.

_Sixth_. There shall be an Auditing Committee of two, whose duty it
shall be to examine and audit all bills and accounts when properly
verified. Such Committee shall report to the Commission at each meeting
the amounts of bills and accounts so audited, together with the total
thereof.

_Seventh_. A Treasurer shall be appointed by the Commission, who
shall pay all bills when they have been properly verified and audited by
the Auditing Committee.

_Eighth_. The Secretary shall prepare and forward to each member of
the Commission a copy of the proceedings of the previous meeting in his
regular monthly calls for meetings.

_Ninth_. The order of business at monthly meetings shall be as
follows:

  1. Reading of minutes of previous meeting
  2. Report of Executive Committee
  3. Report of the Treasurer
  4. Report of regular and special committees
  5. Unfinished business
  6. Communications
  7. New business


A STATE BUILDING

These preliminary formalities over, the Commission began in earnest the
work of preparation for the State's participation at St. Louis.
Believing that the most conspicuous feature of the State's participation
in the Exposition, especially so far as the impression which would be
made upon visitors was concerned, would be her State building, the
Commission gave its first attention to this feature. Having been
assigned such a commanding site, the Commission kept in mind that it was
incumbent upon them to erect upon it a building of appropriate dignity
and dimensions. It soon became evident that, with the appropriation
already made, it would be impossible to erect a suitable building,
maintain it and make suitable exhibits in the great departments of the
Fair in which the State of New York stands pre-eminent. Steps were,
therefore, taken to procure an additional appropriation from the
Legislature of 1903, the matter being placed in the hands of the
Executive Committee.


THE ARCHITECT

At the April meeting Mr. Clarence Luce, of New York city, was appointed
the Commission's architect, and the plans for a State building presented
by him were accepted. On June thirtieth a special meeting was called for
the purpose of considering bids for the erection of the building and
hearing the report of a special committee, consisting of Messrs. Luce
and Van Brunt, who had visited St. Louis to further the interests of the
Commission in this matter.


THE CONTRACTORS

Bids were received from several firms of contractors, ranging from
$80,000 down to the contract price of the building, viz., $56,518, at
which figure Messrs. Caldwell & Drake, of Columbus, Ind., contracted to
complete the building in accordance with plans and specifications of the
architect. The construction work was immediately inaugurated and was
pushed forward so rapidly that the December meeting of the Commission,
which was held on the eighteenth of that month, took place in the New
York State building on the World's Fair grounds. After inspecting the
building and carefully noting the progress which was being made, the
Commission adjourned to meet at the Planters Hotel at seven o'clock in
the evening. Through the courtesy of Honorable George J. Kobusch,
president of the St. Louis Car Company, the private car "Electra"
conveyed the members of the Commission to the grounds and return.


EMBELLISHMENT AND FURNISHING

An offer from the Aeolian Company, of New York city, to install, at its
own expense, a pipe organ in the building was accepted, and an
appropriation of $3,500 was made for an ornamental case to contain the
organ which would be a distinctive addition to the decoration of the
entrance hallway. In the meantime the matter of furnishing the State
building had been in the hands of a Furniture Committee, who had made an
exhaustive investigation upon the subject. In March a contract was made
with Herter Brothers, of New York city, for furnishing the State
building, in accordance with specifications prepared by the Commission,
for $18,000.


THE COMPLETION OF THE BUILDING

By dint of prodigous effort the building was completed, entirely
furnished and ready for the reception of guests on the opening day of
the Exposition, at which time the offices of the Commission were opened
in the State building, the New York offices remaining open throughout
the summer in charge of Harry A. Sylvester.

The architect was commended for the prompt completion of his work in the
following resolutions:

"*Whereas*, in originality of design, perfection in detail and
attractiveness in equipment, the New York State building at the
Louisiana Purchase Exposition is thoroughly representative of the
dignity and position of the Empire State,

"_Resolved_, therefore, that the thanks of this Commission be
tendered to the architect, Mr. Clarence Luce, as a token of our
appreciation of his skill, talent and artistic tastes in creating a
structure which meets with the warmest approval of this Commission, and
which is a fitting home for New York at the World's Fair of 1904.

"_Resolved_, that the secretary be instructed to forward to Mr.
Luce a copy of these resolutions, suitably engrossed."

Throughout the entire Exposition period there were but very few days
that from one to three Commissioners were not present at the State
building.

By resolution the Commission determined that the lady Commissioner and
the wives of Commissioners, assisted by the official hostess, should be
hostesses of the State building during the period of the Exposition, and
in the absence of those, that the official hostess should act in that
capacity, and it was further determined that any Commissioner or a
majority of the Commissioners present at the New York State building at
any time should constitute a house committee, and have full charge of
the State building.


PLANS FOR PARTICIPATION

During the earlier meetings of the Commission they were waited upon by
representatives of the Exposition Company, and by committees or
representatives of organizations within the State either offering to
co-operate with the Commission in the preparation of exhibit material or
requesting appropriations from the Commission's funds to enable them to
prepare exhibits.

In February, 1903, Honorable George L. Parker, a representative of
President Francis, addressed the Commission, urging them to see that New
York State was properly represented. He, stated that the people of the
West expected great things of New York State; that the city of St. Louis
and the territory the acquisition of which was commemorated by the Fair,
spent large sums of money in the city of New York alone, and for that
reason it was hoped and expected that New York should lead the other
States of the Union.

Later in the year, Dr. J. A. Holmes, chief of the Department of Mines
and Metallurgy, appeared before the Commission by invitation and made
some interesting remarks concerning the scientific exhibit, which he
felt it incumbent upon the State to make. He stated that there was no
geological survey, either national or State, as valuable as that of the
State of New York, and strongly advocated that a model oil well derrick
be erected.

The Legislature of 1903 passed two acts which affected either directly
or indirectly the work of the Commission. The first act provided $50,000
for participation in the dedication ceremonies of the Exposition and is
as follows:


CHAPTER 189, LAWS OF 1903

An Act making an appropriation for the due and appropriate participation
by the state in the ceremonies attending the dedication of buildings of
the Louisiana purchase exposition.

Became a law, April 22, 1903, with the approval of the Governor. Passed,
three-fifths being present.

_The People of the State of New York, represented in Senate and
Assembly, do enact as follows:_

SECTION 1. The sum of fifty thousand dollars, or so much thereof as may
be necessary, is hereby appropriated out of any money in the treasury,
not otherwise appropriated, payable to the order of the governor, as he
may require the same, to be expended by him in such manner as he may
deem proper, for the due and appropriate participation by the state in
the ceremonies attending the dedication of buildings of the Louisiana
purchase exposition, to be held on April thirtieth, and May first and
second, nineteen hundred and three, in the city of Saint Louis; and for
the transportation, subsistence and other necessary expenses of the
commander-in-chief and his staff, and of such portion of the national
guard or naval militia of this state as may be directed to attend, and
for the replacement by purchase of such military property of the state,
as may be rendered unserviceable by this duty; provided that officers
and men performing this duty shall serve without pay.

§ 2. This act shall take effect immediately.

The second act amended the original act providing for State
representation, and increased the Commission's appropriation by
$200,000, making $300,000 in all.

The act follows:

CHAPTER 546, LAWS OF 1903

An Act to amend chapter four hundred and twenty-one of the laws of
nineteen hundred and two, entitled "An act to provide for the
representation of the state of New York at the Louisiana Purchase
exposition at Saint Louis, Missouri, and making an appropriation
therefor."

Became a law, May 11, 1903, with the approval of the Governor. Passed,
three-fifths being present.

_The People of the State of New York, represented in Senate and
Assembly, do enact as follows:_

SECTION 1. Sections one, two and three, of chapter four hundred and
twenty-one, of the laws of nineteen hundred and two, are hereby amended
so as to read as follows:

Section 1. The governor is hereby authorized to appoint twelve
commissioners to represent the state of New York at the Louisiana
purchase exposition to be held at Saint Louis, Missouri, beginning on
the first day of May, nineteen hundred and four, and ending on the
thirtieth day of November, nineteen hundred and four, and for the
purposes of this act such commissioners shall be known as the Louisiana
purchase exposition commission. Such commission shall encourage and
promote a full and complete exhibit of the commercial, educational,
industrial, artistic and other interests of the state and its citizens
at such exposition, and shall provide, furnish and maintain, during the
exposition, a building or room for a state exhibit and for the official
headquarters of the state, and for the comfort and convenience of its
citizens and its exhibitors. Such commission shall have power and
authority, in their discretion, to sell or otherwise dispose of any
building, furniture, fixtures or other property which shall have been
acquired by it pursuant to the provisions of this section.

*§*2. The members of the commission shall receive no compensation for
their services, but shall be entitled to the actual necessary expenses
incurred while in discharge of duties imposed upon them by the
commission. Such commission may provide a secretary whose compensation,
to be fixed by it, shall be at the rate of not to exceed four thousand
dollars a year for all services to be performed in carrying out the
provisions of this act, and may also provide such other clerical
assistance and office facilities as it deems necessary, but no salaries
or expenses shall be incurred for a longer period than ninety days after
the close of the exposition.

*§*3. The sum of two hundred thousand dollars, in addition to the sum of
one hundred thousand dollars heretofore appropriated by chapter four
hundred and twenty-one of the laws of nineteen hundred and two which is
hereby reappropriated for the above specified purposes, or so much
thereof as may be necessary, is hereby appropriated out of any moneys in
the treasury not otherwise appropriated for the purposes of this act.
Such money shall be paid by the treasurer on the warrant of the
comptroller issued upon a requisition signed by the president and
secretary of the commission, accompanied by an estimate of the expenses
for the payment of which the money so drawn is to be applied. Within
ninety days after the close of the exposition, such commission shall
make a verified report to the comptroller of the disbursements made by
it, and shall return to the state treasury the unexpended balance of
money drawn in pursuance of this act. No indebtedness nor obligation
shall be incurred under this act in excess of the appropriation herein
made. No member of such commission, nor such officer, shall be
personally liable for any debt or obligation created or incurred by him
as such commissioner, or such officer, or by such commission, or any
such officer.

*§*2. This act shall take effect immediately.


CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER

The title of the Secretary was thereupon changed to that of Secretary
and Chief Executive Officer, and he was clothed with all the authority
and duties pertaining to the latter position, his salary being increased
to $4,000 per annum. Later his duties were further prescribed by the
following resolution:

"_Resolved_, that the Chief Executive Officer shall exercise such
direction and management of the office as shall make effective the
various agencies employed. He shall nominate to the Commission all
clerks and employees in all the departments. He shall fix and establish
all salaries of officers, clerks and employees, subject to the approval
of the Commission. He shall in like manner have power to suspend,
without pay, for cause, upon charges made in writing and filed in the
office of the Commission, with such suspended officers, clerks or
employees, and with the Chairman of the Executive Committee, any and all
officers, clerks and employees of the Commission. Discharges or removals
of such officers clerks or employees must be approved by the Executive
Committee of the Commission. He shall have power to visit and examine
the work and management of the several departments created by the
Commission. It shall be his duty to make regular monthly reports to the
Commission, and at such other times as the Commission may be in session
or request such report."


CHIEFS OF DEPARTMENTS

At the meeting of the Commission held in June, 1903, the following
chiefs of departments were appointed:

Charles H. Vick, of Rochester, Superintendent of Horticulture and
Floriculture, to take effect July 1, 1903, at a salary of $2,000 per
annum.

J. H. Durkee, of Florida, Superintendent of Agriculture, to take effect
July 1, 1903, at a salary of $2,000 per annum.

DeLancey M. Ellis, of Rochester, Director of Education, to take effect
June 15, 1903, at a salary of $2,000 per annum.

Later Mr. Ellis's title was changed to Director of Education and Social
Economy, and he was placed in charge of the exhibits in the latter
department in addition to those of the Department of Education.


APPROPRIATIONS FOR EXHIBITS

The following appropriations were made for exhibits:

Horticulture and Floriculture                         $20,000
Agriculture, including live stock and dairy products   25,000
Education                                              20,000
Social Economy:
  State Commission in Lunacy          $1,800
  State Board of Charities             1,200
  State Department of Prisons          2,000
  State Department of Labor            1,000
  Craig Colony for Epileptics            500
  General expenses                     1,000
                                     -------           $7,500
Forest, Fish and Game                                  18,000
Scientific                                              7,500
Fine Arts                                              10,000
                                                      -------
  Total                                              $108,000

In the departments of Agriculture, Horticulture, and Education and
Social Economy the work was placed in charge of the chiefs above named.
The Scientific exhibit was placed in charge of the Director of the State
Museum. All of the above exhibits were subject to the supervisory
control of the chief executive officer. The Forest, Fish and Game
exhibit was placed under direct control of the chief executive officer,
valuable assistance being rendered, however, by the Forest, Fish and
Game Commission.

The Fine Arts exhibit was provided for in the following resolution:

"_Resolved_, that Mr. W. H. Low, of the Society of American
Artists; Mr. H. W. Watrous, of the National Academy of Design; Mr. J.
Carroll Beckwith, a member of the Art Commission of the city of New
York; Mr. Louis Loeb, of the Society of Illustrators; Mr. Frank C.
Jones, delegate to the Fine Arts Federation from the National Academy of
Design; Mr. Grosvenor Atterbury, of the Architectural League of New
York, and Mr. Herbert Adams, of the National Sculpture Society, be named
as an executive committee on art for the State of New York, whose duty
it shall be to aid the chief executive officer of this Commission to
develop the New York State art exhibit at the Louisiana Purchase
Exposition, said executive committee to serve without expense to this
Commission."

By means of the various agencies provided for the preparation of
exhibits, the work was pushed forward as rapidly as possible, the
Commission keeping in touch with its progress through monthly reports
filed with the chief executive officer by the heads of various
departments.


ASSISTANCE BY EXPOSITION OFFICERS

By the time the Commission held its meeting in St. Louis in December
space had been assigned for most all of the State exhibits. There was an
evident disposition on the part of the Exposition Company to do all in
their power to assist the State of New York in making its participation
an unqualified success. In appreciation of this attitude the following
resolution was passed at the meeting held in the city of St. Louis in
December:

"_Resolved_, that the members of the New York Commission desire to
express to the president of the Louisiana Purchase Exposition Company
and the heads of the various departments with whom they have been
brought in personal contact, their appreciation of the delightful
courtesy extended them. It is obvious that there is a desire on the part
of the Exposition authorities to facilitate the departmental work of New
York in connection with the Exposition. We cannot fail to express our
admiration of the gigantic task which the officers of this great
international fair have carried to such a successful culmination. In the
entire history of expositions, there has been evidenced no greater
progress, and such work could not have been accomplished save through
the most prodigious efforts on the part of the projectors of this vast
enterprise. When St. Louis opens her exposition gates next year, it will
be to invite the world to witness the greatest exposition in all
history. And be it further

"_Resolved_, that the secretary be instructed to forward a copy of
this resolution to President Francis and the heads of the various
departments of the Exposition."


NEW YORK DAY

The Commission took considerable care in the choosing of a day to be
known as "New York Day." It was considered important that a date should
be named upon which it would be possible for the Governor to be present.
Moreover it seemed essential that no date during the heat of the summer
should be designated, as but few New Yorkers would be apt to be present
at St. Louis at that time, and, therefore, after mature consideration,
October fourth was designated as New York State Day.

The Legislature of 1904 passed an additional appropriation of $40,000,
by chapter 640, which is given below:

CHAPTER 640, LAWS OF 1904

An act, to make an additional appropriation to provide for the
representation of the state of New York at the Louisiana purchase
exposition at Saint Louis, Missouri.

[Became a law May 9, 1904, with the approval of the Governor.

Passed, three-fifths being present.]

_The People of the State of New York, represented in Senate and
Assembly, do enact as follows_:

Section 1. The sum of forty thousand dollars, or so much thereof as may
be necessary, in addition to the money heretofore appropriated, is
hereby appropriated out of any moneys in the treasury, not otherwise
appropriated, for the purpose of providing for the representation of the
state of New York at the Louisiana purchase exposition at Saint Louis,
Missouri. The money hereby appropriated shall be applicable to the
purposes specified in chapter four hundred and twenty-one of the laws of
nineteen hundred and two, as amended by chapter five hundred and
forty-six of the laws of nineteen hundred and three, and shall be paid
out in accordance with the provisions of such act, by the treasurer on
the warrant of the comptroller issued upon a requisition signed by the
president and secretary of the commission, accompanied by an estimate of
the expenses for the payment of which the money so drawn is to be
applied.

*§*2. This act shall take effect immediately.

This made possible the elaboration of some of the plans which the
Commission had in mind.


HISTORY OF THE EXPOSITION PERIOD

The history of the Exposition period will be found in other chapters of
this report. A description of the State building, detailed accounts of
the dedicatory exercises and the exercises upon State Day, as well as
other important functions, are given. The exhibits in the various
departments are fully described, and the results of the inspection by
the juries are given.

Throughout the entire life of the Commission death did not enter its
ranks, nor the ranks of its attaches, nor did any untoward incident
arise, although early in the morning of November twenty-first a
catastrophe was narrowly averted. In the middle of the night a fire was
found smouldering in the basement of the building, which, through the
prompt action of the watchman on duty, was extinguished without doing
extensive damage. Many were asleep in the building at the time, and but
for the presence of mind and courage of those on duty the consequences
might have been too fearful to contemplate.


DISPOSITION OF EXHIBITS

At a meeting of the Commission, held just before the close of the
Exposition, the following resolution was passed:

"_Resolved_, that the Louisiana Purchase Exposition Commission of
the State of New York hereby authorizes the Secretary and Chief
Executive Officer, Charles A. Ball, to turn over to the Lewis and Clark
Exposition Commission of the State of New York any of the exhibits, or
such part thereof as the latter may desire in the various exhibit
departments working under the auspices of the Louisiana Purchase
Exposition Commission of the State of New York for the use of said Lewis
and Clark Exposition Commission, State of New York, with the proviso
that in the case of individual exhibits forming a part of said exhibits
the Lewis and Clark Exposition Commission, State of New York, must get
the consent of the owners of said exhibits and relieve the Commission of
all responsibility relating thereto and return said individual exhibits
to their owners at the close of the Lewis and Clark Exposition, it being
understood, however, that said Lewis and Clark Exposition Commission
must take possession of these exhibits not later than December 15,
1904."

Upon requisition from the latter Commission the Secretary and Chief
Executive Officer turned over to the Lewis and Clark Exposition
Commission the following material: The complete exhibit of the State in
the departments of Education and Social Economy; the complete exhibit in
the Department of Forestry, Fish and Game, with the exception of the
Log-cabin and the Forest Nursery and a portion of the State exhibits in
the departments of Mines and Metallurgy and Agriculture.


ACKNOWLEDGMENT TO PRESIDENT FRANCIS AND OTHERS

President Francis and the Exposition officials generally throughout the
entire Exposition period extended to the Commission every courtesy and
evinced a hearty interest in the work of New York, endeavoring to
further the interests of the Commission in every possible direction.
Desiring to express in suitable terms its appreciation of these
courtesies the Commission also passed the following resolutions at its
meeting held at the close of the Exposition:


"WHEREAS, the Empire State is about to close its official connection
with this, the greatest of World's Fairs; and,

"WHEREAS, the members of the Louisiana Purchase Exposition Commission of
the State of New York, appointed by the Governor, desire to express to
the officials of the Fair their sincere appreciation of the hearty
co-operation which they have rendered the members of this Commission, in
every way facilitating the work of New York in each department of State
representation; and,

"WHEREAS, in all of the Commission's relations with the officers of the
Exposition, not only has every courtesy been shown the Commission, but
there has been a friendly desire to promote their interests; therefore,
be it

"_Resolved_, that the cordial thanks of this Commission be extended
to the President of the Louisiana Purchase Exposition Commission,
Honorable David R. Francis; to the Secretary, Honorable Walter B.
Stevens; to the Director of Exhibits, Honorable Frederick J.V. Skiff; to
the Director of Works, Honorable Isaac S. Taylor, and to the chiefs of
each exhibit department of the Exposition, with whom the Commission or
its representatives have been brought in contact; be it further

"_Resolved_, that these resolutions be spread upon the permanent
records of the Commission and a copy of the same forwarded to each of
the above named Exposition officials."


COMMENDATION FOR STAFF

With the exception of closing up its affairs, this marked the end of the
Commission's work and before adjournment the following resolutions
commending the efficiency and faithfulness of its employees were spread
upon the minutes, and a copy was sent to each attache:

"WHEREAS, this Commission is about to close its work, and for this
reason must necessarily very soon dispense with the services of the
appointees who have served under it since its organization and during
the life of the Louisiana Purchase Exposition, it is eminently fitting
that we make record of the faithfulness and loyalty with which said
appointees of every character whatsoever have discharged their
respective duties; therefore, be it

"_Resolved_, that we take pleasure in certifying to the efficient
manner in which our Secretary and Chief Executive Officer, Mr. Charles
A. Ball, has discharged the important duties attached to his position.
From the very inception of the work upon which this Commission entered,
Mr. Ball has proven to be most loyal and faithful, and has ever been
ready and willing to carry out the instructions of this Commission. His
wide acquaintance with the people of New York State, and especially with
her official representatives, has been of inestimable service to this
Commission, not only while the various exhibits were being developed,
but also during the Exposition period itself. That Mr. Ball has
popularized the Commission's work at St. Louis is attested by the
universal commendation which he has received from New York people who
have come in contact with him during their visits to the Exposition and
to the New York State building. Mr. Ball has shown himself to be most
capable in directing the various appointees at the State building and in
the several exhibit departments in the discharge of their various
duties, and has not only carried an this work to the best interests of
the State, but in such a manner as to greatly endear himself to this
Commission and to all of its employees as well. His foresight in
providing for the necessary vigilance during the hours of the night in
the protection of the lives of those in the State building, once
seriously jeopardized by fire, as well as the property of the State from
loss by fire, is especially entitled to the sincere thanks and gratitude
of this Commission;

"_Resolved_, that in Chief Clerk Anthony Pfau, Stenographer Seward
H. French, Clerks Herman W. Kandt and Harry A. Sylvester, the experience
of this Commission has demonstrated that it made most worthy selections.
They have been faithful assistants to Mr. Ball in the discharge of his
duties and this Commission gladly records its commendation of the
ability with which they have discharged their duties;

"_Resolved_, that we extend to the Honorable Frank J. Le Fevre, the
Superintendent, and Mr. George B. Cowper, the Assistant Superintendent,
our sincere appreciation for the most praiseworthy manner in which they
have discharged the difficult duties falling to them, and our very
pleasant relations with them shall be ever held in grateful remembrance;

"_Resolved_, that we have been especially gratified with the highly
satisfactory manner in which Mrs. Dore Lyon, the hostess, Mrs. F. B.
Applebee, the assistant hostess, and Miss Laura C. MacMartin, the matron
at the State building, have acquitted themselves of the duties assigned
to them. We especially accord them our highest appreciation;

"_Resolved_, that this Commission especially commends the faithful
and efficient services rendered by Mr. DeLancey M. Ellis, Mr. J. H.
Durkee, Mr. Charles H. Vick, Mr. A. B. Strough, Mr. H. H. Hindshaw, Mr.
Harry Watrous and Mr. Charles M. Kurtz, and all their assistants in the
various exhibit departments, in which our State has signalized her
pre-eminence as shown by the large number of awards received. These
gentlemen have always proven loyal to the interests of the State and to
this Commission and they are entitled to the highest regard by this
Commission;

"_Resolved_, that for all the subordinate employees of this
Commission throughout the State building and all the departments working
under this Commission, this Commission desires at this time to make
complete record of their efficient loyalty and faithfulness in the
discharge of the various duties assigned to them, and we especially
attest our full appreciation for their efforts at all times to make the
work of this Commission in enhancing the interests of the State a
complete success;

"_Resolved_, that we cannot forget the efficiency of Mr. Hugh J.
Baldwin, who, we believe, by his watchfulness at the time of the fire in
the State building, saved the lives of many of the occupants of the
building as well as the property of the State; for Mr. Hugh W. Bingham,
also on duty during that night, who so efficiently aided Mr. Baldwin in
protecting life and property, we here record our sincerest gratitude;
and be it further

"_Resolved_, that these resolutions be spread upon the minutes of
the proceedings of this Commission and the Secretary is hereby
authorized to transmit a copy of these resolutions to each of the
employees of this Commission."

[Illustration: VARIED INDUSTRIES BUILDING]



CHAPTER III

New York State Building


The New York State building was admirably located upon one of the most
attractive sites within the gift of the Exposition Company, to whom the
Commission, in behalf of the State of New York, desire to make grateful
acknowledgment.


THE SITE

The building stood on the brow of a hill, the land sloping off gently to
the north, and faced upon a broad plaza, through which ran one of the
most frequented highways within the grounds, known as Commonwealth
avenue. For its neighbors were the buildings of Kansas, Iowa,
Massachusetts, Ohio, Wisconsin and Oklahoma, while westward, at the foot
of the hill, was located the great cage erected by the United States
government, which held the exhibit of live birds from the Smithsonian
Institute.

To no state, with the possible exception of Missouri, the home state,
was so large a site assigned as to New York. Its extent, the undulating
character of the grounds, and the presence of many beautiful, stately
trees, afforded countless opportunities for landscape effects. From the
opening day the grounds presented a charming appearance, the well-kept
lawns giving place here and there to large beds of nasturtiums, poppies,
cannae, and rhododendrons, while at the lowest point on the grounds,
near the northeast corner, was located a lily pond. It was filled with
the choicest aquatic plants of every variety, which were furnished
through the courtesy of Shaw's Gardens and the Missouri Botanical
Society. During the season many beautiful bouquets of varicolored
blossoms were gathered and its surface was almost entirely covered by
odd shaped leaves from which peeped here and there the buds of pond
lilies.


TRANSFER OF SITE TO THE STATE

The site was formally turned over to the Commission on October 1, 1902,
and was received by a committee appointed by the president, consisting,
of Commissioners John K. Stewart, John C. Woodbury and James H.
Callanan. The ceremony took place in the presence of Honorable David R.
Francis, president of the Exposition Company, the Director of Works, and
other Exposition officials, the committee of the New York State
Commission and invited guests.

The exercises were brief but impressive. President Francis spoke as
follows:


REMARKS OF PRESIDENT FRANCIS

"A universal exposition, either in the United States or elsewhere, would
be incomplete if the Empire State of the American Union were not
represented. This site has been selected for the great State of New
York, and upon this location we trust there will be erected a structure
which will be in keeping with the glorious record New York and her sons
have made from the beginning of this country. New York needs no encomium
from me, none in fact from her sons. She speaks for herself. The
Director of Works will present to the chairman of the New York
Commission the site for the building of the State of New York."

Honorable Isaac S. Taylor, Director of Works, then formally presented
the site to the Commission, handing to Commissioner John K. Stewart a
handsome banner of purple silk, upon which was painted the coat of arms
of the State of New York. Driving the staff in the ground, thus marking
the site, Commissioner Stewart said:


REMARKS OF COMMISSIONER STEWART

"Mr. President and Gentlemen of the Commission: In behalf of New York
State I receive this emblem. We shall erect here a building suitable for
the great Empire State of New York. I wish to introduce to you Honorable
James H. Callanan, of Schenectady, who will respond in behalf of the
Commission."

Commissioner James H. Callanan then made the following address:


ADDRESS OF COMMISSIONER CALLANAN

"In behalf of the Commission representing the Commonwealth of New York,
I take pleasure in accepting the site allotted for the Empire State's
building at the Louisiana Purchase Exposition. With this acceptance I
beg you to receive the assurance from our Commission that New York will
do her share to make the Exposition an unquestioned success. Upon this
site we expect to erect a handsome and commodious structure where New
Yorkers may meet one another during the Exposition, and where they may
welcome their fellow citizens from every section of our common country.
New York is also desirous of having exhibited here upon these spacious
grounds the evidences of her prestige in the domain of manufacture, of
commerce, of agriculture, of science and of art.

"The American people are progressive. The indomitable courage and
ambition of the American knows no cessation of effort, no lagging
behind. The expositions held in our country have celebrated great epochs
of our advancement, and they will be pointed out to future generations
as evidences of the onward march of a people unparalleled in the history
of the human race.

"To these great achievements of a mighty people it is impossible to
estimate the share contributed by the sturdy pioneers and their
descendants of this vast tract of country, the cession of which more
than doubled the area of our country a century ago. What great states
have been carved out of this territory! What wonderful wealth of
resources have been brought forth here! What a splendid citizenship has
been established in this vast region! New York rejoices with you in the
giant strides made by this newer section of our country.

"It certainly is most appropriate at this time when the republic is
reaching out as a world power that we should celebrate the anniversary
of the first great chapter in the history of our national expansion.
Time has proven that Jefferson and his compeers built greater than they
knew, for by that acquisition of territory there was developed a spirit
of national progress that did not cease even when we first learned to
know no superior among the nations of the earth.

"Representatives of half a dozen different nations met in the smoking
room of an ocean liner sometime ago. It was suggested that each nation
be toasted. An Englishman paid a glowing tribute to his country. A
Frenchman lauded his nation and a Russian eulogized the land of the
Czar. Then an American arose and said: 'Here is to the United States,
bounded on the north by the North Pole, on the east by the rising sun,
on the south by the South Pole, and on the west by the setting sun.' As
he finished another American present requested that he be permitted to
attempt an improvement on the toast given by his countryman, which
request was granted. He then toasted the United States in this fashion:
'Here's to the United States, bounded on the north by the Aurora
Borealis, on the east by infinite chaos, on the south by the procession
of the Equinoxes, and on the west by the day of judgment.' This indeed
is extravagant language, but that fellow possessed the American spirit
which recognizes no limit to the possibilities of our future.

"I recognize that this is no occasion for state boasting. Each state,
territory and American possession is unselfishly interested in the
success of this Exposition. However, in connection with what New York is
expected to do for this grand enterprise, you will pardon, I know, this
very brief reference I make to New York's supremacy in population, in
wealth, in manufactures and in commerce. I think it less than twenty
years ago that New York was ahead in agricultural productions, too.
Agricultural supremacy has been tending westward for nearly a half
century, however, and we cheerfully surrender to your broad prairies.
Iowa, Ohio and Illinois now outrank us in farm industry, the first once
a part of the Louisiana tract and the other two cut from the Northwest
Territory.

"An Eastern farmer on his first visit to the west asked his Western
brother how it was that 'he could plow such straight furrows over such
enormous fields.' 'That's easy,' said the native, 'we follow the
parallels of latitude and the meridians of longitude.' That reply was
significant. It demonstrates quite fully where agriculture is king in
the United States.

"The end of the great strides that you are making here in the west is
not in sight. Some day your population will be as dense as ours. Slowly,
but steadily, the center of population is creeping westward and by
another decade or so it will most likely cross the great Father of
Waters and move across the land which Jefferson's genius gave to the
republic. New York will be more powerful by reason of your greatness.
Your increasing productions will contribute to our commercial prestige
more and more as the years roll on to make our metropolis continue to be
the greatest seaport on this continent for all time.

"We share your glory in more ways than this, too. Many of the sturdy men
and women who have settled within the confines of this great region were
native New Yorkers. Our blood has been mingled with yours and our
children are first cousins of yours. New York gave to you because she
could spare and you accepted of us because you wanted the best you could
find.

"New York then bids the people of this section All Hail! We are with you
heart and soul to make the Exposition a magnificent success. New York
has never failed when a patriotic effort was demanded and as ever before
she will now respond with enthusiasm and will do everything possible
here to sustain her imperial position.

"Let us hope that the Exposition will accomplish all that is intended.
Let our prayer be that all Americans who pass within the gates when all
shall be made ready for the opening of this Exposition in 1904, will
cherish a higher ambition and a greater love of country and be impelled
to declare with the poet, that

"'There is a land of every land the pride,
Beloved of Heaven, o'er all the world beside,
where brighter suns dispense serener light,
And milder moons imparadise the night.
Oh, thou shalt find howe'er thy footsteps roam,
That land thy country and that spot thy home.'"

At the conclusion of Commissioner Callanan's remarks the assemblage
dispersed.


DEDICATION OF THE SITE

The site was formally dedicated at the time of the formal dedication
ceremonies of the Exposition, the special ceremonies being held directly
after the general exercises held in observance of State Day, on May 2,
1903. There were present Governor and Mrs. Odell, the Governor's staff,
a joint committee of the Legislature, Exposition officials, members of
the State Commission and invited guests.

Having assembled upon the site, William Berri, Vice-President of the
Commission, addressed Governor Odell as follows:


ADDRESS BY VICE-PRESIDENT BERRI

"_Governor Odell_: It gives the New York State Commission to the
Louisiana Purchase Exposition very great pleasure to have you present
here to-day to participate in the simple exercises authorized by the
Commission connected with the beginning of the work of construction of
the New York State building which is to be erected upon this site. A
more desirable grant of space on the Plateau of States could not have
been made for us by the management of this Exposition, and we hope to
place here a building that will add dignity to the location and worthily
represent the State of New York in architectural beauty and practical
usefulness. Your commission has been fortunate in securing for the
architect Mr. Clarence Luce, and the plans and drawings which we have
decided upon from his hand give promise of a structure that the State we
represent will be proud of, and we shall also endeavor to so furnish it
and utilize its facilities as to make it a serviceable and attractive
addition to the large number of State buildings that are to be erected
in its vicinity.

"Everything has to have a beginning, so we are here to-day to begin our
work of actual construction, and it is specially fitting that we should
have present the Governor of New York to assist in the ceremonies
attendant therewith, for he has always heartily supported the project of
the St. Louis Exposition and has furthered its interests on every
occasion. Therefore, on behalf of the New York State Commission, I ask
you, Governor Odell, to honor the great World's Fair of 1904 by
performing the first actual work upon the structure we propose to erect
by turning the first spadeful of earth for the State of New York and the
New York State building."

The Governor responded briefly, commending the Commission for its work,
predicting wonderful benefits to accrue from the Exposition and
prophesying that New York would be at the forefront in all of its
departments, after which he lifted the first spadeful of earth upon the
site. He then handed the spade to Mrs. Odell, who lifted another sod;
after which various ladies in the party performed the same act; at the
conclusion of which the assemblage adjourned.


OPENING OF THE BUILDING

The building of the State of New York was the only building on the
Terrace of States entirely ready for the reception of guests on the
opening day of the Exposition. It was a structure thoroughly in keeping
with the dignity and prestige of the great Empire State. Of marked
simplicity in design, there was in its every line and appointment
evidence of the utmost refinement and culture.

The building was planned primarily for the comfort, accommodation and
convenience of visitors from the Empire State, for the holding of such
functions as the Commission were required to give in the name of the
State, and for the meetings of any associations or delegations from New
York attending the Exposition. It contained no exhibits of any kind, all
of the exhibits being placed in the main exhibit palaces under the
proper subdivision of the official classification.


THE ARCHITECTURE

The building was pure Italian in style, surmounted by a low dome and
surrounded by verandas and terraces. Through the main approach one
entered a large hall sixty feet square, running the full height of the
building, arched and domed in the Roman manner, with galleries around
the second story. From this hall ascended the grand staircase, both to
the left and to the right.


MURAL DECORATIONS

Under the four arches were handsome mural paintings, the work of Florian
Peixotto, illustrating "De Soto Discovering the Mississippi," "The
French and Indian Occupation," "New York in 1803," and "New York in
1903." The four pendentives which supported the dome contained
emblematic pictures representing the four States most benefited by the
Louisiana Purchase, Missouri, Louisiana, Mississippi and Alabama. The
lower hall was of the simple Doric order, and the staircase was
augmented by two memorial columns surrounded by dancing groups
beautifully modeled, each column surmounted by a light. To the right of
the entrance hall, and separated from it only by huge pillars, was a
large assembly hall fifty by sixty feet, which was used for receptions,
dinners and other State functions given by the Commission. This hall was
most richly decorated in old golds, Antwerp blues and siennas and, with
its crystal chandeliers and barrel vaulted ceiling running up through
the second story, was one of the most attractive features of the
building. Beyond the grand hall were small dining rooms and serving
rooms connected with the culinary department. To the left of the
entrance hall were waiting rooms, writing rooms and retiring rooms for
the accommodation of guests, while at the extreme south end of the
building were two reading rooms, in which were on file the various daily
papers of the State. But seldom were the reading rooms without visitors
eagerly familiarizing themselves with what had happened at home
subsequent to their departure. Also, on the first floor were coat rooms,
a bureau of information, postoffice, telegraph and telephone offices.


OFFICES OF THE COMMISSION

The second floor contained the offices of the Commission, which were
occupied by the Secretary and the clerical force, and also eight suites
of rooms, consisting of parlor, bedroom and bath, for the accommodation
of the members of the Commission and their guests. One of these suites,
more handsomely furnished than the others, was called the "Governor's
suite," and was reserved for his exclusive use. While not originally
contemplated, the third floor in both the north and south ends of the
building were finished and partitioned into rooms for the use of the
attaches of the Commission. This increased the capacity of the building
by eight rooms.


THE SCULPTURE

Eminent sculptors were employed to prepare the statuary for the building
which was generally conceded to be as fine as any upon the Exposition
grounds, being most admirably adapted to the building as to scale. There
were two massive quadrigae flanking the dome typifying the "Progress of
Art" and the "Progress of Commerce," which were the work of Phillip
Martiny, to whom was also intrusted the work of preparing the elaborate
group, crowding the main entrance to Festival Hall and entitled "Apollo
and the Muses." About the huge columns flanking the steps which formed
the approach and again about the columns at the foot of the grand
staircase were dancing groups most gracefully modeled by Oscar L. Lenz.
The same sculptor was also responsible for the figure of "Greeting"
which stood in the lower niche at the north end of the building. The
coat of arms of the State which appeared frequently in the scheme of
decoration was by Allen G. Newman. The work of reproduction in staff of
the models prepared by the artists was performed by Messrs. Barth &
Staak.


THE LIGHTING

The lighting of the building throughout was by electricity, and was
particularly effective in the main entrance hallway, in that the lights,
for the most part, were concealed behind cornices giving a very soft
effect, and displaying to the best advantage the mural paintings.
Throughout the building electroliers of special design were used. In the
main hallway they took the form of quaint Florentine lanterns which were
particularly rich in modeling and were an important factor in the scheme
of decoration.


THE FURNISHINGS

The furnishings were most appropriate and harmonious throughout, much of
the furniture having been especially built for the place in which it was
to stand. In the main hallway stood massive Florentine chairs and
settees, with high backs, upholstered in mottled embossed leather, each
bearing the coat of arms of the State. The waiting and writing rooms
were appointed and finished in the same simple design which prevailed in
the main hallway, light green being the dominating color, the furniture
being of mahogany, upholstered in Bedford cord. The effect was most
restful to the tired visitor who entered the rooms upon a warm summer
day, and their popularity was attested by the number of Exposition
visitors, both from New York and elsewhere, who sought their quiet and
refreshing atmosphere to recover from the fatigue of Exposition sight
seeing.


THE ARCHITECT

The entire work of designing the building, sculpture, decorations and
furniture was intrusted to Mr. Clarence Luce, of 246 Fourth avenue, New
York city. Thoroughly familiar with the traditions of the great Empire
State, Mr. Luce made the work committed to him a matter of State as well
as professional pride, and the result of his long experience, coupled
with his artistic temperament and sound judgment, was a building to
which each New Yorker pointed with the utmost pride and which each
stranger praised unstintingly. The prompt completion of the work so
thoroughly and satisfactorily done was a source of gratification to the
Commission, who at the first meeting held in the building passed
commendatory resolutions concerning Mr. Luce.

There were State buildings which represented an outlay of considerably
more money, but none which typified the commonwealth for which it stood
more thoroughly than did the New York State building.


THE RESTAURANT

A pleasant feature was a private restaurant, conducted by Messrs. Bayno
& Pindat, of New York city, the former being the inventor of an electric
range which was used in the preparation of food. The kitchen and
commissary department was in the basement at the north end of the
building. The privileges of the restaurant were by card only, and were
extended to New Yorkers, Exposition officials and prominent Exposition
visitors. The cuisine was most excellent, and throughout the season
appetizing meals were served on the spacious verandas at the north end
of the building, over which canopies had been erected, the illumination
being furnished in the evening by electric lights, contained in Japanese
lanterns. No restaurant upon the grounds enjoyed a greater popularity
among those who were privileged to use it than did that of the New York
State building.


THE ORGAN

To the Aeolian Company, of New York city, the Commission is indebted for
one of the features of the building. This company placed a magnificent
pipe organ in the east balcony of the rotunda, and in the gallery north
of the grand hall, nearly 100 feet away, was installed an echo organ,
while a set of cathedral chimes sounded softly from still another
distant part of the building. All three instruments were under control
of the organist at the console located upon the main floor of the
entrance hall, and could be played either by hand or by music rolls
manufactured by the Aeolian Company. The organ was equipped with an
electric keyboard which permitted the playing of all three instruments
or any single one, as the operator desired. The main instrument was
contained in an artistic case, which, with its decorative ornament, was
built by Charles and Jacob Blum, of New York city, and was an important
enrichment of the hall.

Mr. S. H. Grover, a representative of the company, was in attendance
throughout the summer and gave a recital each day at three o'clock in
the afternoon. These recitals soon came to be a feature of the
Exposition, and were largely attended by music lovers.

The program played on New York State day is given below, and is a fair
specimen of the programs rendered throughout the season.

  Overture, "Oberon"                              Von Weber
  Serenade                                        Schubert
  The Nightingale                                 Delibes
  Overture, "Stradella"                           Flotow
  Berceuse, "Jocelyn"                             Godard
  Selections, No. 11, "La Boheme"                 Puccini
  Am Meer                                         Schubert
  Introduction, Act III, "Lohengrin"              Wagner


THE PIANO

The Commission also acknowledges the courtesy of Steinway & Co. in
placing in the State building one of the finest instruments ever turned
out by this famous firm of piano builders. Its purity of tone and
singing qualities were remarkable, and during the season several
recitals were given upon it by eminent musicians. The piano was
appropriately named "The Wave," illustrating as it did the wonderful
waterways of the Empire State. The case was made of white hard maple,
admirably adapted for fine carving. Some distance from the edge of the
top the smooth surface commenced to take the undulations of the surface
of water, gradually increasing in volume until the edge was reached,
where the waves seemed to flow over in an irregular line down the sides,
here and there forming panels. The three supports were composed of
female figures sculptured in wood; one supported by a dolphin suggested
the mythical origin of the harp, another was poised upon a dolphin's
back, and the third was a water nymph nestled among the rocks and spray.
The music desk contained a picture of sunrise on Lake Erie. All of the
carving was colored with translucent greens and blues enhancing the
graceful undulations and wave movements. The panels were all designed to
illustrate some of the most important views of the waterways of New York
State. The first represented New York harbor, the next East river
spanned by Brooklyn bridge, another the Hudson, with its palisades. The
panel over the rear support was a view of Albany, showing the Capitol on
the hill at sunset; another showed Cohoes Falls and the Erie canal; the
next contained a picture of Little Falls; the last being a picture of
Buffalo harbor. On the top, as a fitting finale, was a large picture
representing the American Falls at Niagara. Underneath the front half of
the top was painted the coat of arms of the State.


THE STAFF

The State building was at all times in charge of a competent and
obliging staff, which always stood ready to minister to the comfort and
pleasure of the guests of the Empire State. Honorable Frank J. LeFevre,
of New Paltz, was Superintendent. He performed the arduous duties of
directing the actions of the force and attending to a multitude of
details with cheerfulness and efficiency. He was ably assisted by George
E. Cowper, of Olean, the Assistant Superintendent.

The social functions given in the name of the State Commission were
directed by Mrs. Norman E. Mack, the lady member of the Commission,
whenever she was present. In her absence the social duties fell upon
Mrs. Dore Lyon, who invariably extended the State's hospitality with
grace and tact. The assistant hostess, Mrs. F. P. Applebee, won many
friends in the course of the season through her courteous treatment
toward all guests. The comfort of the Commission and their house guests
was admirably provided for by Miss Laura MacMartin, the matron.

Acknowledgment is also due to those who faithfully served the Commission
in the State building in various capacities throughout the Exposition
period.

[Illustration: LIVINGSTON MEMORIAL TABLET]



CHAPTER IV

Functions Held at the New York State Building

[Illustration]


The State building was generally recognized as the social center of the
Exposition. Many functions were given throughout the season by the
Commission in the name of the State, and the building was constantly in
demand for private entertainments. The use of the building was freely
granted by the Commission so long as the date did not conflict with that
of an official function. To enumerate all of the social events taking
place in the State building is not within the province of this
Commission.

A list of the official and the more important unofficial functions is
given below:

_Saturday, April 30_. Opening day. A luncheon was given to members
of the Commission and distinguished guests.

_Wednesday, May 4_. Luncheon given by the State Commission for Mrs.
Martin H. Glynn, of Albany, wife of National Commissioner Glynn, and for
Mrs. John K. Stewart, wife of Commissioner Stewart. Ladies only were
present. The guests were received by Mrs. Norman E. Mack, assisted by
Mrs. Glynn, Mrs. Stewart and Mrs. Dore Lyon.

_Friday, May 20_. Reception given by the State Commission to the
New York State delegation to the National Editorial Association, 9 to 11
P. M. The guests were received in behalf of the Commission by
Commissioner and, Mrs. James H. Callanan, of Schenectady, and by
Commissioner and Mrs. John C. Woodbury of Rochester, assisted by Mrs.
Dore Lyon.

_Monday, May 23_. Reception given by the National Society of New
England Women. The guests were received by Mrs. Swinburn, of New York,
the President of the Society, Mrs. John C. Woodbury and Mrs. James H.
Callanan.

_Tuesday, May 24_. Reception given by the State Commission to the
Federation of Women's Clubs, 4 to 6 P. M.

_Wednesday, June 1_. Breakfast at 12 M. given by the State
Commission to Miss Alice Roosevelt. Only ladies were present. The guests
were received by Commissioner Mrs. Norman E. Mack, Mrs. James H.
Callanan, Mrs. John Young and Mrs. Dore Lyon. There were about 200
ladies present.

_Tuesday, June 7_. Ball given by President David R. Francis and
Mrs. Francis in behalf of the Louisiana Purchase Exposition Company to
the West Point cadets, 9 to 12 P. M. Music was furnished by two bands
stationed in the north and south galleries of the entrance hall.
Refreshments were served upon the verandas. Among the distinguished
guests were General Nelson A. Miles and General H. C. Corbin.

_Saturday, June 11_. Reception tendered by the Executive
Commissioners' Association to the State Commissioners and World's Fair
officials. This was an informal affair for the purpose of bringing the
States' representatives into closer relations. The receiving line
consisted of Honorable J. A. Yerrington, President of the Association;
Mr. Charles A. Ball, President of the Executive Committee of the
Association; Mrs. F. B. Applebee; Mr. and Mrs. F. R. Conaway and Mr.
Stacey B. Rankin.

_Wednesday, June 15_. Luncheon by the State Commission in honor of
Mrs. William Berri, wife of Vice-President Berri, and Miss Stern, of New
York city. The guests were received by Commissioner Mrs. Norman E. Mack,
Mrs. Berri and Miss Stern.

_Friday, June 18_. Dinner given at 7 P. M. by Mr. Louis Stern,
Chairman of the Executive Committee of the Commission, in honor of
President and Mrs. Francis. Mr. Stern was assisted in receiving by Miss
Stern and Mrs. Norman E. Mack.

_Saturday, June 25_. Dedication of the New York State building.
Exercises described in Chapter V.

_Thursday, June 30_. Reception given by the State Commission to
officers and members of the Council of the National Educational
Association and to New York State teachers. The guests were received by
Vice-President and Mrs. William Berri; Commissioner and Mrs. John K.
Stewart; Mrs. Dore Lyon; Honorable Howard J. Rogers, Chief of the
Department of Education of the Exposition, and Mrs. Rogers; John W.
Cooke, president of the National Educational Association; and Mrs.
DeLancey M. Ellis. An organ recital was played by S. H. Grover and
refreshments were served in the grand hall.

_Monday, August 1_. Reception given by the Executive Commissioners'
Association.

_Thursday, September 1_. Reception given by the Executive
Commissioners' Association.

_Thursday, September 8_. Reception given by Mrs. Dore Lyon to the
Hostesses' Association.

_Monday, September 12_. Electrical engineers tendered a reception
to the visiting engineers assembled in convention on the Exposition
grounds.

_Monday to Wednesday, October 3 to 5_. New York State week.
Exercises described in Chapter VI.

_Tuesday, October 11_. Reception given by the Liberal Arts Club.

_Friday, October 28_. Dinner given by Commissioner Frederick R.
Green, who was assisted in receiving by Commissioner Mrs. Norman E.
Mack.

_Tuesday, November 15_. Brooklyn day. Exercises described in
Chapter VII.

_Saturday, November 19_. Luncheon given by the Michigan Commission
to the Governor-elect of Michigan. The invited guests included
Vice-President William Berri and Secretary Charles A. Ball, of the New
York State Commission.

_Monday, November 21_. Reception and ball given by the Beta Sigma
Chapter of the Kappa Sigma Fraternity. (This function was to have been
held in the Missouri building. The use of the State building was
extended on account of the destruction of the Missouri building by fire
on Saturday, November 19th).

_Tuesday, November 22_. Young people's dance. Courtesy to Missouri
Commission on account of fire.

_Thursday, November 24_. Thanksgiving day. Exercises described in
Chapter VIII.

_Friday, November 25_. Charity ball and Kirmess given by the ladies
of St. Louis for the benefit of the Martha Parsons Free Hospital for
Children of St. Louis, and for the fund for the Trades School for Girls
of New York. The majority of the guests were in fancy costume. In
addition to the regular dancing program there were special fancy dances.

_Monday, November 28_. Dinner given by the State Commission in
honor of Honorable Oscar S. Straus and Mrs. Straus, and Honorable St.
Clair McKelway and Mrs. McKelway. Vice-President Berri of the Commission
presided, and the guests were received by Vice-President and Mrs. Berri
and Mrs. Norman E. Mack, assisted by the guests of honor.

In addition to the above entertainments two musicales were given under
the auspices of Boellman Brothers; and the Pikers' Club, an organization
composed of attaches of the State building, gave a minstrel performance
at the Inside Inn on Monday evening, September nineteenth, for the
benefit of the Model Playground and Day Nursery.

[Illustration: ON THE LAGOON]



CHAPTER V

Dedication Day


The New York State building was dedicated with appropriate ceremonies on
Saturday, June twenty-fifth. The exercises were attended by Governor
Odell and invited guests, members of the State Commission, Exposition
officials, State and foreign representatives and many others.


PROGRAM FOR DEDICATION DAY

The program for the day was as follows:

  10:30 A. M. Concert on Plaza in front of State building by Weil's band
        of St. Louis

  11:30 A. M. Exercises in grand hallway, William Berri, Vice-President
        of the Commission, presiding

  Invocation by the Rev. Carroll N. Davis, Dean of Christ Church
        Cathedral

  Address of welcome by President David R. Francis

  Address transferring State building to Governor Odell by Vice-President
        William Berri

  Acceptance by Governor Odell

  Organ recital by S. H. Grover

  8 to 11 P. M. Reception given to Governor and Mrs. Odell by the State
        Commission

  Music by the Haskell Indian band

The day opened bright and clear, the warm rays of the sun being tempered
by a cool breeze. The building was not opened to the public until the
conclusion of the band concert, which was held between 10:30 and 11:30.
As soon as the doors were opened a large audience quickly gathered to
take part in the formal exercises of the day. In the assemblage was an
interesting couple, Mr. Horace Stowell, aged 93 years, and wife, who had
journeyed from Madison, N. Y., a distance of over a thousand miles, to
be present at the dedication ceremonies and to visit the Fair.


THE FORMAL EXERCISES

Promptly at 11:30 William Berri, Vice-President of the Commission,
called the assemblage to order and introduced Rev. Carroll N. Davis, who
offered the invocation. At its conclusion Mr. Berri delivered his
address. The slight change in program was due to the fact that President
Francis was necessarily detained for a short time.

Vice-President Berri said:

"Governor Odell, it is with very great pleasure your New York State
Commission to the Louisiana Purchase Exposition welcomes you in the New
York State building here erected upon the spot where a little over one
year ago you honored us by turning the first spadeful of earth for the
foundation.

"Your Commission has endeavored to carry out your expressed wishes to
provide for the people of New York who may visit this wonderful World's
Fair, a building that shall fittingly represent the State of New York
and add its share with the other state buildings to beautifying the
grounds.

"We are much pleased that it is a matter of record that not only was
this building complete in every detail and its doors thrown open for
inspection on the opening day of the Exposition, but also that all
exhibits under the control of your Commission, in the various
departments, most of which are very much larger than ever before shown
by New York State, were ready and in place at the moment President
Francis officially declared that the great St. Louis Exposition was open
to receive the world.

"We wish to thank President Francis and all officials connected with him
in this great undertaking, for the uniform courtesy with which we have
been treated, and for the valuable assistance that has been so
generously given to us in carrying out our plans.

"It has been a most pleasurable task. We have fully accomplished what we
have sought to attain. There is nothing lacking in the realization of
our anticipations. As to whether we have acted wisely it is for you to
judge. If, as the executive head of our State, it shall please you to
commend the results we submit for your approval, this will be the
proudest day in the history of the Commission."

As Governor Odell rose to respond to the remarks of Mr. Berri, he
received an ovation, for which he bowed acknowledgment several times and
finally raised his hand for silence. He spoke as follows:


ADDRESS OF GOVERNOR ODELL

_"Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen"_

"We are here to-day to dedicate a building which represents the interest
of New York State in this great Exposition. Here, during the period when
thousands shall visit these grounds, those who owe allegiance to the
Empire State will find a place which will typify to them their home and
impress them, let us hope, to a greater degree with the vastness of our
State and of the position which it occupies in our commonwealth of
nations. To those who have been intrusted with the work we owe thanks
for the conception of their duty and for this magnificent edifice which,
in its strength and beauty of architecture, is symbolical of the Empire
State. In every phase of our nation's history, in all that has made it
great and powerful and respected, New York has been both conservative
and wise in the aid which it offered, powerful in the resources which it
furnished in the building up of our republic. From the time when the
courage and patriotism of our forefathers wrought out the nation down to
the latest acquisition of our territory there is no page of history
which does not tell of the devotion and statesmanship of New York's
citizens.

"It is always a remarkable event in the history of the world when one
nation disposes of any part of its domain to another through peaceful
methods. War has almost always been the means through which nations have
expanded and pushed forward their boundary lines. Trade requiring an
outlet has more frequently been the cause of bloodshed than almost any
other national or international question. That our country, therefore,
at an early period in its history, should have been able, through
peaceful means, to secure the vast domain beyond the Mississippi is a
tribute to the statesmanlike policies of those who conceived its
purchase. True it may be that the wars of other nations aided in its
consummation, but it is also equally true that the man who was most
directly responsible for the purchase was a son of the Empire State. Nor
did the results of this early diplomatic victory stop here. The
principle thus established has frequently led to more peaceful methods
of adjusting questions of territorial boundary, both in our own and
other countries. It may be that much that has since been accomplished
through arbitration is but the evolution of this idea, and it may lead,
let us hope, to the time when such questions will no longer render
necessary the arbitrament of the sword.

"It was proper, therefore, that our State, in its dignity, with its
conservatism and with its intense patriotism, should be among the first
to contribute of its means to make of this Exposition the grand success
which it promises. With each succeeding international exposition the
world becomes wiser, artisans more skillful, the contributions to
science and art more valuable; in a word, they raise the standard of
civilization and hasten the time when all men shall pay homage to the
ruler of the universe. As inventions are developed which make the worker
more effective, which broaden the field of usefulness, there come
responsibilities and problems which require education and discernment to
meet and solve. Under the softened touch of Christianity, religion and
education there should come about a universal brotherhood of man broad
enough in scope to embrace all humanity. In all the work of the world,
in all that is for the development of man, in everything that holds out
promise to the future, New York State we may justly say, if not the
leader, is at least in the fore ranks. Its broad acres are rich and
fertile, and the commerce of the world enters at its ports. The
manufacturer finds willing hands with remunerative wages striving to
produce that which is necessary for our comfort and which adds so much
to the wealth of the nation. Its laws are broad and ample in their
scope, with no distinction as between man and man, and beneficent in
their operation, while our citizens evince impulses which are worthy of
emulation by all those who believe in the future of our republic. We
have more of wealth and a greater population than any other State within
the Union. Our cities are cosmopolitan in character, made up of
representatives of all nations, but so nicely adjusted are our laws that
they are assimilated into our population and become Americans among
Americans, actuated by a common patriotism and a common desire for the
continued development of our land.

"In these great halls, in these magnificent buildings devoted to art, to
education, to mechanics and to agriculture, exhibits are to be found
which are on a par if they do not excel, those of other nations. The
advancement of New York, however, is but typical of every other State in
the Union, in the continued prosperity of which all are equally
interested. A nation of separate States, there is no dividing line of
envy between them, no wish except for the prosperity and development of
each, a common hope for a common country. How necessary it is,
therefore, that in all that has to do with society a broad catholic
spirit should dominate and control. Ours is not a country of classes,
but one of equality--a country whose aim is the education of its
citizens. It is our common object to perpetuate the principles of
American independence. Anything that retards human progress, or that
would make of a man a mere machine without brains, is to be deprecated.
Our object should be to encourage and to promote thrift, and to instill
into the mind of every citizen a desire for advancement. In this
direction our State will be found always in the forefront and the
evidence of her greatness will be measured rather by the intelligence of
her citizens than by mere accumulation of wealth. Therefore, that which
protects labor, which encourages capital, should be the aim of modern
legislation. While we participate in the celebration of this great
national event, as we mark our progress along every line, we feel a
natural pride in all that has been done in other States, in all that has
been accomplished by other people. As we look into the future, as we
consider its possibilities, let us hope that our nation will never
forget that this government is one by the people, and that its power and
influence among the nations of the world will continue only so long as
due weight and consideration is given to the rights of individuals.
While rejoicing as citizens of New York, let us hope for the continuance
of those policies and principles which have made our nation prosperous,
and let us not forget that moderation and conservatism should be the
measure of our efforts, and all that we do shall be for the advancement
of all the people.

"The citizens of New York extend their congratulations to the people of
the west and northwest. We hope that from this great Exposition there
shall come a closer communication between all the people of the earth, a
broadening of human effort, the advancement of civilization and a
growing respect for our country and our flag which will make us a power
for the good and peace of the world.

"It is a great pleasure for me to accept on behalf of the State of New
York this magnificent building, and again to congratulate you as the
President of the Commission, and the architect who has wrought this
wonderful work, for the painstaking care that you have exercised in the
development of New York's interests in this great Exposition."

During the address of the Governor, President Francis quietly entered
and was introduced at its conclusion. He was warmly received and made a
characteristic address. He paid a warm tribute to the Empire State and
her Chief Executive, and complimented the State Commission upon the work
it had performed and spoke of the New York State building as one of the
social centers of the Exposition.

His remarks in part follow:

"Your distinguished son, Robert R. Livingston, was the man who first
negotiated for the purchase of Louisiana. No exposition would be
complete without a representation from the Empire State. The Exposition
management has already pointed with pride to the New York building, the
social functions of which have been among the marked attractions of the
Exposition.

"I am here to thank New York not only for her material contribution to
the World's Fair, but for the spirit her citizens have given to this
Exposition.

"We of the West flatter ourselves that we have arrived at that stage of
our progress when we can invite every people on the globe to come and
see for themselves what a century of Western civilization has
accomplished."

At the conclusion of the ceremonies Governor Odell held an informal
reception, during which Mr. S. H. Grover, of New York, played an organ
recital.

THE EVENING RECEPTION

The State building was appropriately decorated for the evening reception
given in honor of Governor and Mrs. Odell, and many hundred guests
called to pay their respects between the hours of eight and eleven. The
receiving party consisted of Governor Benjamin B. Odell, Jr., Mrs.
Odell, Mr. and Mrs. William Berri, Mrs. Norman E. Mack, Mr. and Mrs.
John K. Stewart, Mr. and Mrs. John Young, Mrs. Daniel Manning, Mr. Frank
S. McGraw, Mr. Frederick R. Green, Mr. John C. Woodbury, and Mr. William
T. Van Brunt, representing President Harriman. The guests were presented
to the receiving party by Major Harrison K. Bird, private secretary to
the Governor. Two lines of United States marines guarded the approach to
the receiving line and prevented crowding and confusion.

Music was furnished by the Haskell Indian band and later in the evening
dancing was indulged in by many of the guests present. Supper was served
at ten o'clock at small tables on the verandas, the following being the
menu:

     CELERY             OLIVES               RADIS
AMANDES SALEES                         FEUILLES SUEDOISES
             BOUCHEES DE VOLAILLE A LA REINE
CANAPES DE LUXE                       SANDWICHES ASSORTIS
 GLACE NEW YORK                            FRIANDISES
                         CAFE
    LEMONADE                           EXPOSITION PUNCH


[Illustration: GRAND BASIN, FROM FESTIVAL HALL]



CHAPTER VI

New York State Week


The week beginning October third was set aside by the Exposition
authorities as New York week; Monday, October third, being designated
"New York City Day," and Tuesday, October fourth, "New York State Day."


NEW YORK CITY DAY

New York City Day was observed with exercises in the City Building on
the Model street at eleven o'clock in the morning, which were presided
over by Thomas W. Hynes, the Commissioner officially representing the
city. Mayor McClellan was represented by Charles V. Fornes, President of
the Board of Aldermen. There were also present an official delegation
representing the city. Addresses were made by Archbishop J. J. Glennon,
of St. Louis; Right Reverend Bishop McNamara, of New York city; Walter
B. Stevens, Secretary, and F. J. V. Skiff, Director of Exhibits of the
Exposition; Howard J. Rogers, Chief of Department of Education and
Social Economy, and others. Luncheon was served at noon at the Tyrolean
Alps, and from three to five in the afternoon a reception was held in
the City Building, which was attended by exposition officials, national
and state representatives, St. Louis society and many New Yorkers. In
the evening a sumptuous banquet was served in the Town Hall of the
Tyrolean Alps, which was presided over by Commissioner Hynes.


SERENADE TO GOVERNOR ODELL

Governor Odell and staff and invited guests reached St. Louis Monday
morning, October third. At noon the Governor was tendered a serenade by
the Philippine Constabulary band of 100 pieces. On Monday evening a
dinner was given at the State building by the New York State Commission
in honor of the Governor and Mrs. Odell, and President and Mrs. Francis.
Owing to a death in the family, President and Mrs. Francis were unable
to be present. Mr. D. M. Houser, of the Board of Directors, represented
President Francis. There were no formal speeches, Governor Odell simply
regretting that President Francis could not be present.


PROGRAM FOR NEW YORK STATE DAY

The program for New York State day was as follows:

  11 A.M. Concert by the Garde Republicaine band, of
        Paris, France, on the Plaza in front of the State
        building

  12 M. Formal exercises of the day in the grand entrance
        hall, Col. Edward Lyman Bill presiding
    Invocation by Rev. Dr. William W. Boyd, of St.
        Louis, formerly of New York
    Address of welcome by Col. Edward Lyman Bill.
    Address of greeting in behalf of Exposition Company
        by Hon. Franklin Ferriss
    Address by Governor Benjamin B. Odell, Jr.
    Organ recital by S. H. Grover, of New York city

  9 to 12 P. M. Reception and ball given by the New York
        State Commission in honor of Governor and Mrs.
        Odell. Dancing after ten o'clock

While not marked by the presence of militia and other spectacular
features which generally accompany the celebration of a State Day, the
exercises in the State building which were held at noon were most
dignified and impressive. The day opened clear and cool, and the
spacious verandas of the State building were well filled long before the
time set for the concert.


THE GARDE REPUBLICAINE BAND

The Garde Republicaine band is composed of 100 skilled musicians and is
considered by many to be the finest band in the world. No musical
organization which visited the Exposition during the entire season
received more compliments or more flattering press notices than those
accorded this band. They played the following program:

  1. March, "Lisbon"--L. Planel
  2. Overture, "La Princesse Jaime"--C. Saint-Saens
  3. Fantasie On the Opera "LeCompte Ory"--G. Rossini
      Soloists, MM. Paradis, Laforgue, Joseph Barthelemy,
      Morfaux, Couilland, Fournier
  4. Three Celebrated Menuets--
      (a) Menuet--L. van Beethoven
      (b) "Ox" Menuet--J. Haydn
      (c) Menuet Favori--W. A. Mozart
  5. March, "Egyptian"--J. Strauss

At the conclusion of the formal exercises they were entertained at
luncheon by the State Commission. Through their leader, M. Gabriel
Pares, they expressed hearty appreciation of the courteous treatment
accorded them by the State of New York, and attested the same by playing
a second concert in front of the State building between the hours of two
and four in the afternoon. It was worthy of note that the building of
the State of New York was the only State building at which this band
played during its entire stay at the Exposition, their concerts being
invariably given either in Festival Hall or in the grand bandstand in
Machinery Gardens.


THE FORMAL EXERCISES

At twelve o'clock the assemblage was called to order by Colonel Edward
Lyman Bill. There were present Governor and Mrs. Odell, the Governor's
staff, a joint committee of the Legislature, members of the State
Commission, invited guests, several representatives of the Exposition
Company, representatives of State and foreign commissions, and a large
audience, many of whom had journeyed all the way from New York State to
be present at the ceremonies.

The personal party of the Governor consisted of Governor Benjamin B.
Odell, Jr., Mrs. Odell, Mrs. William Kelly, Mrs. S.L. Dawes, Mrs. Hall
and Miss Odell.

The Governor's staff comprised Brigadier-General Nelson H. Henry,
Adjutant-General and Chief of Staff; Major Harrison K. Bird, Military
Secretary; Lieutenant-Colonel Charles H. Sherrill, Aide-de-camp;
Lieutenant-Commander Alfred Brooks Fry, Naval Militia, Aide-de-camp;
Major Charles C. Davis, Thirteenth Regiment, Aide-de-camp; Major Richard
H. Laimbeer, Second Brigade Staff, Aide-de-camp; Major Amos E. McIntyre,
First Regiment, Aide-de-camp; Captain John T. Sadler, Thirtieth Separate
Company, Aide-de-camp; Captain Edwin W. Dayton, Twenty-second Regiment,
Aide-de-camp; First Lieutenant William L. Thompson, Twelfth Separate
Company, Aide-de-camp; First Lieutenant Chauncey Matlock, Third Battery,
Aide-de-camp; First Lieutenant Thomas Barron, Seventh Regiment,
Aide-de-camp; First Lieutenant Augustus S. Chatfield, Eighth Regiment,
Aide-de-camp; First Lieutenant Cornelius Vanderbilt, Twelfth Regiment,
Aide-de-camp.

The joint committee of the Legislature comprised Hon. Jotham P. Allds,
Norwich; Hon. S. Frederick Nixon, Westfield; Hon. James T. Rogers,
Binghamton; Hon. Edwin A. Merritt, Potsdam; Hon. Robert Linn Cox,
Buffalo; Hon. Thomas D. Lewis, Oswego.

Colonel Bill called upon the Rev. W. W. Boyd, of St. Louis, formerly of
New York, to invoke the Divine blessing.

Dr. W. W. Boyd:

"Our Father, we thank Thee for this beautiful day and this assembly of
the loyal sons and daughters of our native State. We rejoice that Thou
hast gathered us into families, and so into communities, commonwealths
and the perfect union of all the states.

"We bless Thee for the history of this great State, its part in the
glorious Revolution, in the preservation of the Union, its development
in every branch of human industry, its material prosperity, but above
all, for its humanities, its growth in philanthropy, education and
religion.

"Bless, we beseech Thee, His Excellency the Governor, and all associated
with him in making, interpreting and executing the laws.

"Bless the President, Directors and all who have helped to create and
develop this marvelous Exposition, especially the Commissioners of the
State of New York, who have erected this splendid building, and by the
varied exhibits in the palaces of the Exposition portrayed the wonderful
progress of the Empire State.

"And grant, O most merciful Father, that the fruits of this great
Exposition may be enlarged national prosperity, international comity and
peace, and the strengthening of the ties of human brotherhood throughout
the world.

"May Thy special blessing be upon the exercises of this hour; may the
words of our mouth and the meditation of our hearts be acceptable in Thy
sight, O Lord, our Strength and our Redeemer. Amen."

Colonel Bill then delivered the following address:


ADDRESS OF COLONEL BILL

"On behalf of the New York State Commission I extend greeting and hearty
welcome to the official representative of President Francis, to Governor
Odell, our distinguished guests, to the sons and daughters of New York,
and to all who have honored us with their presence here to-day. It was
on this site, upon May 2, 1903, Governor Odell lifted the first spadeful
of earth where this beautiful structure has since been erected. Upon
that occasion New York was represented by our Chief Executive, his
staff, and troops numbering nearly fifteen hundred men from all branches
of the military and naval service of the State. On last April thirtieth
this building, sumptuously appointed, was formally opened to the public.
I may say, with pardonable pride, that the report which the Commission
made at that time showed that not only was our building complete in
every detail, but all of the State exhibits as well were ready for
inspection. The work of our Commission has been along pleasant lines,
and we have been constantly stimulated by hearty support from the
Exposition authorities. It is fitting that we should express our sincere
appreciation to President Francis and the sterling coterie of men with
whom he is surrounded for the aid and assistance which they have so
willingly rendered this Commission in every way. Our Governor has taken
a warm interest in New York's participation at this Fair, and on many
occasions he has made manifest his desire that New York's representation
should be ample and complete in every particular. In many of the
magnificent places, such as Education, Agriculture, Horticulture,
Forestry, Fish and Game, Mines and Metallurgy, our State has collective
exhibits which show her varied resources. In this beautiful structure
will be evidenced further proof of New York's generous participation in
this great Exposition. The Louisiana Purchase Exposition has a deep
interest for New York, for one of the principal figures instrumental in
bringing about that purchase was Livingston, a distinguished son of the
Empire State, and it was he who negotiated the treaty and was first to
sign it. And yet the real authors of that great transaction on this side
of the ocean were neither Jefferson, Madison nor Livingston, and I think
historians will agree with me when I say it was more the influence of
those hardy frontiersmen of Kentucky who demanded free navigation for
the magnificent inland river which rolls by us in its eternal flow to
the Gulf of Mexico. The influence of those men, the vanguard of
civilization, could not be disregarded by those who were at the head of
our governmental affairs more than a century ago. Then, the more we look
at this transaction, the more evident it is that the outcome of it was
due to that man whose shadow even now falls sharply athwart the whole
continent of Europe--Napoleon Bonaparte. It was his ambition which threw
into the grasp of the infant republic the splendid empire out of which
have been carved twelve sovereign States and two Territories. At that
time Napoleon uttered one of those far-seeing expressions which is
important in its prophecy. 'Perhaps,' he said, 'it will be objected to
me that the Americans of two or three centuries hence may be found too
powerful for Europe, but my foresight does not embrace such remote
fears. Besides, we may hereafter expect rivalries among members of the
Union. Confederacies that are called perpetual last only until one of
the contending parties finds it is to its interests to break them. It is
to prevent the danger to which the colossal power of England subjects us
that I would provide such a remedy.' No such vision of the future came
to our American statesmen, many of whom bitterly opposed the purchase of
the Louisiana Territory. When the bill came up for discussion on the
floor of Congress, Josiah Quincy, afterwards mayor of Boston, and for
many years president of Harvard College, said, speaking of the
incorporation in the Union of the territory of Louisiana: 'It appears to
me that this measure would justify revolution in this country. I am
compelled to declare it as my deliberate opinion that if this bill
passes, the bonds of this Union are virtually dissolved; that the States
which compose it are free from their moral obligation, and that, as it
will be the right of all, so it will be the duty of some to prepare
definitely for a separation, amicably if they can, violently if they
must.' He said further: 'If this bill passes, it is a death blow to the
Constitution.' Strange words, indeed, in our ears at this time, and it
shows that the American statesmen of those days had not the imagination
of Napoleon.

"What has this purchase meant to New York to have in this Union this
great empire? What has it meant to the Union itself to have this
splendid territory incorporated in it? It has meant for New York
prosperity and increased commerce to the people of all our land and
furnished homes for the sons and daughters of New York. The States
carved out of that great Empire have all borne their share in the heat
of our national life and they have contributed immeasurably to the
nation's growth and development, and we have come in this country,
notwithstanding the immense separation and diversity of interests, to
work together under one flag, with one interest for a common country,
and this great Exposition should teach not only us of the East but of
all other sections of the country that we should avoid the danger of
finding ourselves separate in sentiment from one another. In this great
western empire we all take a common interest, and the success of this
Exposition redounds to the credit and honor, not only of the men who
have carried it to such successful issue, but upon the whole country. We
all shine in the reflected glory of the Louisiana Purchase Exposition,
which shows the high-water mark of human progress. It is indeed the
greatest of all international fairs and a lasting credit to the artistic
skill of the men who planned and executed it. It is the culmination of
all that has been done in the wide expanse of territory purchased from
France in 1803, and the achievements of all nations in the world since
that day. It is a far cry from the early oriental fairs in the East,
which were perhaps the early ancestors of this great Exposition, and all
honor and credit and glory is due the men who stood shoulder to shoulder
in carrying this great enterprise to such a magnificent culmination. It
represents American skill, American enterprise, American endeavor, and
its influence will be felt upon this country long after those men who
have played their successful part in this great moving drama have passed
from earth. Words are inadequate to fittingly describe the beauties of
this magnificent Exposition. It is individual effort as well as
concerted effort which has brought about these splendid results. It is
one of the brightest pages in American history, and what glorious
memories a perusal of these pages arouse! We can turn the pages of
recorded history from the time when the boats of the adventurous Genoese
unfolded their white wings in the harbor of Palos and sped across the
unknown seas to bring back upon their return evidence of the existence
of a new world far across the wide waste of waters. In fancy we picture
that sturdy band kneeling with Columbus, richly attired, upon the tropic
sands, while over them floats the blood and gold banner of Spain, as the
priest clothed in vestments of his office asks the blessings of Almighty
God upon the land which Columbus claims in the name of the House of
Castile. In the background we see waving palms and dark-skinned men who
gaze with awe upon the white discoverers. In another scene we see the
cold wintry waves surge and dash around the frail craft fighting its way
across dark tempestuous seas from Plymouth, the little bark tossed like
a feather here and there until she lands on that rock-bound coast known
as New England. We see that little colony--Freedom's seed--germinate and
thrive; first the grain, then the tender plant, ever exposed to severe
conditions, then matured into the oak of a giant nation. We see those
brave colonists who have planted the banner of human liberty upon the
inhospitable shores push ever onward, ever extending the fringe of
civilization, struggling against disheartening obstacles, fighting wild
beasts and savage men, but pushing on with indomitable courage. We see
the historical gathering at Philadelphia, resulting in that document
embodying Jefferson's superb crystallization of popular opinion that
'all men are created free and equal and endowed with certain inalienable
rights, that among these are life, liberty and the pursuit of
happiness;' that American magna charta which swept away forever the will
of kings in this land. The people became the rulers and the accident of
birth carried no rank, conferred no privilege. We see the loosely joined
colonies building a nation which contained these elements of greatness
little dreamed of by those hardy pioneers who so generously gave up
their offering of blood on Freedom's altar. The kaleidoscope still
turns. We see those intrepid founders of the school of liberty pushing
their lines ever onward across rivers, deserts, over mountains clad with
eternal snow until the golden shores of California gladden the eye of
our valiant explorers. Then a pause, and over land and sea hang dark
clouds of fratricidal war. Four long years through the valleys and over
the mountains of the Southland surges the red tide of battle. The days
were dark and full of gloom, when lo! the clouds parted and the heavens
again were blue. The nation had been born anew, and on the fair pages of
her history appear no longer the dark stain of human slavery. The strong
arm of enterprise quickly washed away the red stain of war. The word
'America' had a deeper and more sacred meaning than before, and the
nation was re-established on the indestructible foundation of national
unity; the blocks were laid in the cement of fraternal esteem. Still the
picture which we see revolves. Across the waters of the Pacific America
sweeps towards the fulfillment of her world wide destiny. The Stars and
Stripes wave over the palace of the kings in Honolulu. Still again the
nation's sword is unsheathed in the cause of human liberty, and the last
vestige of Spanish power is swept from the new world. The thunder of
Dewey's guns awakens us to the fact that the American banner is planted
into the far Orient, there to stay forever, and under its protecting
folds manifold blessings are carried to the people of those islands
lying in the purple spheres of summer seas. While the drum of all
American progress is heard around the world, it too may be truthfully
said that the sun never sets upon the soil over which Freedom's banner
proudly floats, for when the light of the dying day is fading from Porto
Rican hills the golden rays of the morning sun are reflected upon the
shimmering folds of Old Glory on the gray old battlements of Manila.

"It is indeed inspiring, the history of this great nation, guided to its
ultimate issue as a stately ship is wafted over the seas to the harbor
of its destination. I wonder if in this ceaseless struggle for gold and
gain we pause long enough to study the true character of those men to
whose valorous deeds we owe so much, those men who planted the tree of
human liberty so deep that even the shock of revolution of succeeding
wars could not uproot it, those men who demanded of Jefferson a free
Mississippi and who made this Exposition possible. All honor to those
heroes who stood shoulder to shoulder in the days which tried men's
souls, who, in the gloom and suffering of Valley Forge, saw in the
distance the rainbow of hope shining over the dark clouds of defeat.
They saw the light of a great nation which would serve as a beacon in
the world progress and a refuge for the persecuted of the nations of
earth. All races contributed to the founding of this beloved country.
The roster of the Revolution is filled with names which show that the
liberty loving of all European nations gave up a generous offering of
blood on Freedom's altar. In our veins courses blood of all nations, and
it is the healthy commingling of that blood which has produced a race of
world conquerors. It has produced the men who have made possible this
great Exposition. We have been placed in the world's crucible, have been
melted in the glowing heat of a nascent life, and have been forged into
a weapon which shall carve the world. Our ideals are worthy, the hopes
and aspirations of the nation devoted to justice and love; ideals which
shall be the steadfast inspirer of nations and individuals to
uprightness, to justice and to honor."

The presiding officer then expressed regret at the unavoidable absence
of President Francis on account of bereavement in his family. He
introduced judge Franklin Ferriss, General Counsel to the Louisiana
Purchase Exposition Company, who delivered the following address:


ADDRESS OF JUDGE FERRISS

"I regret extremely, for your sake and his, that the brilliant man who
stands at the head of this Exposition cannot be here to-day to greet you
in person. Still I must admit that I am not unmindful of the fact that I
owe to his misfortune and yours the very great privilege of appearing
before you to extend a welcome to the people of my native State.

"The President of the Exposition bids me say to you that there has been
no occasion on these grounds--that there will be none in the future--in
which he would more gladly participate than this.

"The Exposition management feels under peculiar obligations to the State
of New York. We are indebted largely to her prompt and liberal
co-operation for the high stand which the Exposition has taken. We are
indebted to the Governor, to the New York Commission, to the gracious
hostesses of this building, to the splendid woman who has, with rare
tact and dignity, co-operated with the Exposition as President of the
Board of Lady Managers.

"In the building of this Exposition, science, invention, art,
manufacture, the field, the forest, the mine, the air and the water have
contributed their choicest treasures. How well we have succeeded in
presenting them you must judge. But I wish to say to you that no matter
how high a standard we have reached, still more important than all else
is the representation upon these grounds of our splendid American man
and womanhood. No man can walk about this Plateau of States, view these
beautiful structures, see the people coming together from the north and
the south, the east and the west, uniting in common loyalty and respect
for our institutions, without feeling his heart swell with pride and
gratitude.

"It is no disparagement to our sister States, for me, a loyal son of New
York, to say that it is most fitting that the Empire State should be
pre-eminent here also in the beauty of her building, the character of
her exhibits and the magnificent representation of her people.

"I am proud of the State of New York--proud of her history, her
scholars, her statesmen, her soldiers--proud of her material
prosperity--proud of the great metropolis through whose gates thunders
the commerce of the United States.

"I love the State of New York--her broad and fertile valleys, her
stately rivers, the lakes which glisten like jewels on her bosom, her
mountains which rear their tops to the clouds; but most of all I love
the quiet life of the country home--the honesty and industry of the
plain people.

"Our old home! Who can forget it? The great barn with its huge beams and
fragrant mows of hay--the sparkling brook whose shining shallows bathed
my naked feet--the broad meadow with its fence corners of luscious
berries--the old schoolhouse, whose desks are impressed with generations
of jack-knives! Was there ever so sweet a draught as that which we drew
from the shining depths of the old well?

"And yet the country boy grew restless. With his ear to the ground, he
heard the distant hum of industry. He heard the tramp of a million feet
in the great cities. He felt that the battle of life was on, and, that
he must take his place in the struggle. And so he turned his back upon
the old home.

"Ah! how many grave faced fathers and tender, sweet faced mothers have
watched their boys, one by one, go out into the world, and have turned
back in solitude, cheered by an occasional visit, an occasional letter,
to wait until their days should be fulfilled. And how many of us must
now say that their days have been fulfilled, and that a simple stone
marks their last resting place in the village churchyard.

"What have we gained by this? Contentment? They had it. Respect of our
fellowmen? They had it. Success in life? They had it. True, their
fortunes were small--and yet they had no clutching fear that
speculation, fraud or treachery would rob them of the fruit of a life's
toil. And they had an abiding faith that there would be provision for
the years to come. Aye, that there would be provision for the last
journey to that land, where, according to their simple faith: 'The
wicked cease from troubling and the weary are at rest.'

"I will yield to no man in loyalty to the State of my adoption; but who
can chide me if my heart clings to the home of my childhood, to the
graves of my forefathers?

"If we, who have left the old home to build a new one in the West, can
be faithful to the traditions of our childhood--if we can bequeath to
our children the lessons of industry, honesty and economy which our
fathers gave to us--we shall do more to honor the State of New York than
we could do by rearing marble to the skies."

The presiding officer then introduced Honorable Benjamin B. Odell, Jr.;
Governor of the State, who received a great ovation, it being some time
before the Governor was able to proceed with his remarks. His speech was
punctuated with liberal applause.

He said:


ADDRESS OF GOVERNOR ODELL

"The diplomacy which led up to the acquisition of the Louisiana
territory furnishes one of the most interesting incidents in the world's
history. The establishment of a republic devoted to the interests of,
and affording liberty of conscience and freedom of action to its
citizens, was an experiment in government which could not have succeeded
if any restraint had been placed upon that liberty, or if its
constitution had not been broad enough to meet the demands of a growing
country. From the settlement of America down to the Revolutionary War
sanguinary strife had been the lot of the American people. The thrifty
Dutch and the stolid determined Anglo-Saxon sought not in this country a
mere temporary home, for, unlike the Spaniards, their dream was not of
gold, but rather their hope was for a liberty so broad and catholic in
its character that it would grow with succeeding years and make certain
that peace they had sought for in vain in the land of their birth.

"The earlier colonial and Indian wars had drawn upon the resources and
heroism of our forefathers. Hardship and toil had imbued them with a
consciousness of their strength and instilled into them that spirit of
independence which enabled them, after long years of strife, to
establish our republic. It was this people, after having gained their
independence, in the belief that foreign complications were forever at
an end, who, at the close of the Revolution, turned their attention to
peaceful pursuits and endeavored to meet every requirement of a growing
country. With characteristic skill and industry they began the
development of those tremendous resources of our country, the measure of
which is almost beyond human conception. Here, under liberal laws and
wise administration, the people found that which had been heretofore
lacking in the government of the world. Invention had not yet made
possible the intercommunication facilities which we of the present
enjoy. Upon water transit, therefore, they were obliged to depend for an
outlet for the commerce of their western territory. The barriers which
were sought to be interposed to communication over the mighty river
which rises in the northwest brought forth vigorous protests from those
who had just begun to cultivate its fertile fields. Angry passions were
aroused, and the people of our country who had been so successful in
carving out the republic demanded that this barrier should be removed.
Livingston and Monroe, clothed only with power to effect a treaty which
should insure this right of transit, with no possible opportunity of
quick communication with their government, took upon themselves the
responsibility which brought to a successful consummation the
relinquishment of this vast territory.

"Thus was brought to the people of the United States a question which
had never been contemplated by the framers of the constitution. That
instrument had been the production of the wisest men of the times. They
had successfully met the problem of drawing into an indissoluble union
the thirteen states, many of which were acting under peculiar laws which
were contrary to the Declaration of Independence, under which the
battles for freedom had been fought and won. While there was authority
for the admission of new states, there was no constitutional permission
for the purchase of territory. The power of the Federal government to
perform acts of sovereignty had not yet been passed upon, and there was
grave doubt as to the wisdom of ratifying the treaty without a
constitutional amendment. When we look over the results which have
followed this expansion of our country, when we calculate our manifest
growth in population, in wealth and in industry, all of these appear
insignificant beside the result which was accomplished in showing to the
world that we were living under a constitution broad enough in its
provisions to be so interpreted as to insure success to popular
government. That Jefferson and his advisers acted wisely in so
construing their power at that time is undoubted. If there were no other
achievements of that wonderful administration, then this alone would
suffice to make it a memorable one.

"Doubt, lack of courage and insincere opposition are always the refuge
of a coward. Here was a nation demanding that which was necessary for
its trade, desirous of reaching a solution through peaceful means if
possible, but determined to acquire it at all hazards if necessary.
There was no question as to the consent of those whom we took over, and
to whom we gave the protection of our flag, or as to nice points of
constitutionality, when the greater object in view was the onward
progress of civilization, the building up of hope and the fulfillment of
our destiny as a nation, to perpetuate those principles which mean so
much in the redeeming of the world. The exigencies of a later war found
a precedent in the courage of Jefferson and enabled Lincoln to wipe from
the escutcheon of state the blot of slavery which had too long tarnished
it.

"That the acquisition of this territory was accomplished through
peaceful means rather than by bloodshed was another triumph for
civilization. While wars have come since, and may come in the future,
the plan of arbitration which has been adopted so generally by this and
other nations may perhaps have had its inception in this peaceful
solution of a burning and important question to this country. Our Union
now is one that is composed of commonwealths bound together by all that
means common interest, the common weal and common protection of all the
people. It leads to the hope that when the representatives of all of the
states have decreed by a majority that which is for the best interest of
the whole country, then these questions should no longer be the subject
of partisanship or party differences, but the government should have the
loyal support of all who believe in America and her future. The same
laws govern us, the same protection should be and is accorded to every
citizen, and there is no individual or isolated community that does not
share in the prosperity of all others whose interests are on the same
plane of equality. For a time natural advantages may unduly favor one
section of the country, but the accumulation of wealth brings about the
development of the natural resources by which other sections are built
up, and their people share in the general prosperity. Our State perhaps
has benefited more through the development of the west and the northwest
territory than almost any other commonwealth. The natural valleys which
permitted the building of the Erie canal and the connection of the Great
Lakes with the harbor of New York brought this territory in close
communication with the Atlantic seaboard. The growing demands of the
world led to the cultivation of the fertile fields of the west, the
development of the mines and the building up of cities and manufactures,
until to-day we have other ports whose facilities have been increased by
the improvement of waterways and the building of thousands and thousands
of miles of railroad. While there may be an apparent decrease in some
localities and a corresponding benefit in others, yet so intimate are
our connections and associations that the prosperity of one, instead of
being a menace to the growth of any other locality, really aids in
building it up. So diversified are our interests, so skillful our
people, that we may compare the whole Union to a great workshop, one
vast cultivated field of industry, all laboring, not for the advancement
of separate cities or localities, but for the continued growth of our
common country.

"It is only through ignorance that people have a misconception of these
truths. The development of the human mind is no less important than the
development of the physical condition of man. His education, therefore,
is a paramount duty of the state, and his protection against the
weakening of his physical condition is equally important. That
legislation has recognized these facts is shown in laws, not only of the
nation, but of each individual state, which seek to guard and protect
the youth against unwise labor, which seek to instill into his mind that
intelligence which comes only from wise and broad educational
facilities. Every able bodied citizen of our country is an asset, and
those who through weakness, however painful the admission may be, are
incapacitated from labor, must be entered upon the debit side of the
national ledger. Therefore, the laws that guard against burdensome toil,
too long hours of labor, and against ignorance, are not only
humanitarian in their character, but are best calculated to promote the
interest of all the people. In the division of society, those who labor
and those who represent capital should always be in accord, and the
demands of either should never trespass upon the rights of the other. It
is too frequently the case that through misunderstanding of our laws and
the higher economical conditions that friction does arise between these
two great elements of society. The right of every man to sell his
products or his labor in the best market is unquestioned, and any
interference with this principle of sound government is a menace to the
republic itself. We are reaching a point in our history when
conservative and wise judgment must prevail, and the common sense of the
people dictates such a solution of these problems as will meet every
demand that is in harmony with sound government. Our own State has taken
long steps in advance upon these questions, and to us with whom these
differences more frequently occur the people will look for wise
deliberations and conclusions.

"Every man should be a part of the government. He should feel it to be
as much his duty to respond to civic responsibilities as do those living
under a monarchy, whose early tuition instills in them the belief that
they owe the best part of their lives to the military service of their
government. As they are undeterred by fear of death or disaster, so
should our young men be undeterred from entering public life by calumny,
villification and abuse, which they see too frequently and too unjustly
bestowed upon others.

"New York is here to-day by its official representatives to testify
first to its loyalty to the purposes for which this Exposition was
conceived; to show the people of the West that in their progress we are
interested, and that to them we look for such returns in dividends upon
the stock of patriotism as will give to our nation men of energy, of
right impulses. To you we owe much, and from you we expect much. Our
efforts will be to aid you in every laudable undertaking, to stand
behind you in all that means the prosperity of our common country. You
have here an Exposition of which you may be justly proud. Nothing like
it has ever been known in the annals of the world. Skilled workmen from
all parts of the earth are here to aid in its success. Here you witness
not only the steady progress that has been made in the sciences, the
arts, and agriculture, but you have before you also exhibits from some
of the possessions which have recently come under our control. We may
study here some of the problems which demand solution at the hands of
the American people. Our flag has been planted in a far-off land, and we
must face responsibilities which it would be cowardly to shirk. A
message has come to us as to all other nations, to do the Master's
bidding and to spread christianity and civilization into the remotest
parts of the earth. To us have been intrusted duties that have cost us
the blood of some of the bravest men of the north and of the south, of
the east and west. Here we may see something of that which has been
accomplished, as well as a presentation of those conditions which it is
our duty to correct. It is our privilege to give to others the same
liberty which we enjoy ourselves, to establish some form of government
such as ours whenever these people are ready for it, and it is our duty
to protect them in their weakness until they are prepared for it. It was
the dream of our forefathers that our country should be confined between
these two magnificent oceans, but despite these hopes in later years
additional responsibilities have come, Which the American people are too
proud to shirk and too courageous to abandon. There is no one who has
seen the progress which is here represented who does not believe that
the work for civilization which is ours to perform has already had such
an impetus that the time will come when we shall bless those who had the
courage to stand for it against those who demanded another solution of
this important question. To our credit be it said, that no true American
demands the surrender of these possessions, and that the only question
of difference between the people of our country is whether they shall be
given their independence now, or when they are in a condition to enjoy
it.

"This Exposition stands, not only as a monument to our progress, but to
our united and determined effort to take a prominent part in all that
means the advancement of mankind and the prosperity of the whole world.
We owe that which we are at present to the devotion and heroism of the
men of the past, and to protect and guard the inheritance which has come
to us should be our aim. To be broad and conservative in our conception
of our duties and responsibilities should be our purpose. To instill
into the minds of our youth a determination to meet every question with
true American courage should be our object. Every effort that makes for
the good of humanity is a fitting tribute to that national policy which
has taught us that there is no responsibility too great for our citizens
to bear, and that in the onward progress of civilization America
recognizes her duty and will not fail in its performance."

At the conclusion of the Governor's address the benediction was
pronounced by the Rev. W. W. Boyd, after which Governor Odell held a
public reception, shaking hands with several hundred people, who pressed
forward to greet him. During the progress of the reception Mr. S. H.
Grover, of New York city, rendered an organ recital. Luncheon was served
the Governor and party in the offices of the Commission, and the
afternoon was devoted to sight seeing.


THE EVENING RECEPTION

In the evening was held the grand reception and ball in honor of
Governor and Mrs. Odell. Six thousand invitations had been issued for
the function, those invited including the President of the United States
and his Cabinet, judges of the United States Supreme Court, United
States army and navy officers, governors of all the states, New York
State officers, members of the New York State Legislature, judges of the
Court of Appeals and Appellate Division and Supreme Court, Exposition
officials, members of the National Commission, members of State and
Foreign Commissions, the Board of Lady Managers and many prominent
citizens of the Empire State and St. Louis. In spite of the fact that
the day assigned to the State of New York, a year before by the
Exposition Company, fell upon the date of the greatest festival of all
the year in St. Louis, viz., The Veiled Prophets' ball, which is similar
to the Mardi Gras festival at New Orleans, it did not affect the
attendance at the reception in the least, many people attending both
functions. Throughout the evening the capacity of the building was taxed
to the utmost by those who came to enjoy New York's proverbial
hospitality.

The exterior of the building and the grounds were illuminated on a
lavish scale by the Pain Pyrotechnic Company, of New York city. The
entire building was outlined by means of thousands of fairy lamps, and
many strings of Japanese lanterns were festooned from the roof line to
the veranda balustrade. Fairy lamps were used in profusion about the
grounds, forming unique figures, and at various points spelled the words
"New York." At no other function during the entire Exposition were such
elaborate illuminations attempted on the part of any state commission.
The interior decorations consisted of the National and Exposition
colors, gracefully wound here and there about the pillars, supplemented
by festoons of smilax, which was used in profusion in the entrance
hallway. Special music for the event was furnished by Fancuilli's band,
of New York city, and Schoen's orchestra, of St. Louis, which were
stationed respectively in the south and north galleries of the grand
entrance hall.


THE RECEIVING PARTY

The receiving line was stationed at the foot of the grand staircase, the
guests entering at the south portal of the building and approaching
through the reception rooms.

Receiving with the Governor and Mrs. Odell were Mrs. Norman E. Mack,
Colonel and Mrs. Edward Lyman Bill, Mr. and Mrs. John C. Woodbury, Mr.
and Mrs. Frank S. McGraw, Mr. Frederick R. Green, Mrs. Daniel Manning,
Hon. S. Frederick Nixon, Mrs. Doré Lyon and Hon. James T. Rogers. The
guests were presented to the Governor by Major Harrison K. Bird, his
military secretary, two lines of United States marines guarding the
approach to the receiving party. The Governor's military staff,
resplendent in vari-colored uniforms, formed a line directly in front of
the receiving party, and, while adding eclat to the occasion, prevented
any crowding about the receiving line.

Supper was served at eleven o'clock at small tables upon the verandas.
The following was the menu:

  RADISHES         CELERY        OLIVES
      SALTED ALMONDS      BONBONS
OYSTERS A LA PAULETTE      CHICKEN SALAD
           ASSORTED SANDWICHES
      ICE CREAM        PETIT FOURS
LEMONADE         COFFEE      CLARET PUNCH

Dancing began at ten o'clock and continued until the wee sma' hours.


CONCLUDING FUNCTION

The final event of State week was a breakfast given by the State
Commission on Wednesday noon in honor of Governor and Mrs. Odell, and
Mrs. Daniel Manning, President of the Board of Lady Managers. The
breakfast was perfectly informal, no set addresses being delivered.

The functions of the entire period were voted by one and all to have
been most successful in every respect, and New York again proved its
right to the title of a most gracious and generous host.

[Illustration: COLONNADE OF STATES]



CHAPTER VII

Brooklyn Day


One of the last special days to be observed during the Exposition was
Brooklyn Day, the exercises of which were held on November fifteenth. As
one of the speakers on the occasion aptly said, it was the only day
throughout the Exposition period which was formally set apart by the
Exposition management in honor of a political division less than a
municipality. A special train bearing a large delegation of
representative Brooklynites arrived in St. Louis Monday, November
fourteenth. Although the date was late in the season, the weather was
ideal, and everything was done for the pleasure and comfort of the
visitors. The ceremonies were divided between the New York State
building and the New York City building, upon the Model street, and
consisted of exercises at 11:30 A.M., followed by a luncheon at one
o'clock at the New York State building, and a reception at the New York
City building from eight to ten in the evening.


THE PROGRAM

The program for the formal exercises in the New York State building was
as follows

  Address of welcome, William Berri, Vice-President, New York State
      Commission

  Address, Hon. J. Edward Swanstrom, on behalf of the Committee of One
      Hundred

  Permanent Chairman, Colonel William Hester, president of the Brooklyn
      Eagle

  Response, Major Peter J. Collins

  Address, Hon. Rolla Wells, Mayor of St. Louis

  Response, Hon. Charles A. Schieren, ex-mayor of Brooklyn

  Oration, Hon. Thomas P. Peters, editor of the Brooklyn Times

  Aeolian organ recital

Promptly at 11:30 A. M. the assemblage was called to order by
Vice-President William Berri, who, in behalf of the State Commission,
extended a cordial welcome to all present. He then called upon J. Edward
Swanstrom, who made brief remarks in behalf of the Committee of One
Hundred.

At the conclusion of Mr. Swanstrom's remarks, Colonel William Hester was
installed as permanent chairman. Upon taking the chair Colonel Hester
said:


COLONEL HESTER'S REMARKS

"I am very sensible of the honor conferred upon me, but will be unable
to fulfill the duties, except in a most perfunctory way. It is very much
to be regretted that the Honorable Martin W. Littleton is not able to be
with us to-day. As the official head of the government of the borough,
he was to have presided on this occasion. In his absence Major Peter J.
Collins, who was at the head of an important department, will respond
for his chief. I now introduce to you Major Collins."


SPEECH OF MAJOR COLLINS

"_Your Honor, Mr. Francis, and ladies and gentlemen:_ In responding
as the representative of the administration of the borough of Brooklyn,
I feel that you must realize the unenviable position I occupy of
appearing on such brief notice and of acting as the mouthpiece of our
president, the Hon. Martin W. Littleton. Mr. Littleton instructs me to
convey his most sincere regrets to your honor, to Mr. Francis and to the
ladies and gentlemen constituting the Committee of One Hundred, on his
enforced absence on this occasion. As some of you are aware, there has
been an election in this land. Previous to this election there was
carried on what some of us supposed was a political campaign. This
campaign engaged the interest of every worthy citizen and public and
private affairs of business have been neglected to some extent as a
consequence. In the business of the borough Mr. Littleton is confronted
with a vast accumulation of matters of greatest importance to Brooklyn,
both in the local work and in the various boards and committee meetings
in Manhattan, and he has reluctantly concluded that his absence from the
city at this time would amount to an almost criminal neglect of his
duty. He asks me to convey to you the congratulations and good wishes of
the many thousands of our people who are unable to be with us to-day.
Brooklyn has had a deep sympathy with your fair city in this tremendous
enterprise, and has watched with keen interest and satisfaction your
success in overcoming the many difficulties that lay in your way.
Brooklyn herself has awakened from her sleep of almost ten years, and
the sound of the hammer and the saw and the ring of the trowel are heard
on every hand. Owing to the enterprise, energy and self-sacrificing
efforts of many of the men who are with us to-day, she is astonishing
the country by the wonderful increase in population. Brooklyn can no
longer be regarded as the bedroom of Manhattan, for Manhattan is rapidly
becoming only the workshop of Brooklyn; we can no longer be regarded as
the little brother of Manhattan, for we are rapidly becoming a very big
brother. Consequently, ladies and gentlemen of St. Louis, we feel
qualified to appreciate the satisfaction and joy you may justly feel in
this your hour of triumph, and we extend to you the right hand of
fellowship and congratulate you on this wonderful creation of yours,
that must go down in history as the greatest exposition in the history
of mankind."

Mayor Wells was unavoidably detained by an important engagement. The
Chairman then introduced Mr. Schieren, and in doing so said:

"This is no fairy story, yet I will commence it that way. Once upon a
time we of Brooklyn had a city all to ourselves. We were proud of our
city and very desirous that it should be well governed, and were careful
in the selection of men to fill its highest office, and thus it came to
pass that one of our most successful efforts in that direction was the
choice for mayor of our city of the gentleman whom I shall now present
to you, Ex-Mayor Charles A. Schieren."

Mr. Schieren was warmly received and spoke as follows:


ADDRESS OF EX-MAYOR SCHIEREN

"In the name of the Brooklyn delegation I thank you sincerely for your
cordial greeting and the hearty welcome extended to us. We fully
appreciate your kind hospitality. We have come here to enjoy this
glorious Exposition which already has attained such a great fame. Its
magnificence and grandeur, both as to the magnitude of its buildings and
their exhibits, is a surprise to every visitor. You may be proud of your
achievements.

"This Exposition seems to exceed all others held in this country, and in
many respects those held in the world.

"The Centennial Exposition of Philadelphia, commemorating the foundation
of our government, gave our people the first idea of the extent and
scope of our labor-saving machinery and the advance made in the
manufacture of our American goods. It stimulated the manufacturing
interests in our country.

"The Columbian Exposition at Chicago commemorated the discovery of
America. It was noted for its excellent foreign exhibits. It gave our
people an opportunity to compare the products of America with those of
other nations. The so-called White City had a peculiar charm and made a
deep impression upon every one. It seemed a perfect dream, ever to be
remembered. People declared that it could not be excelled, but hardly a
decade has passed when the enterprising, energetic citizens of the
commercial metropolis of the great southwest arranged another World's
Fair to commemorate the historical events of the famous Louisiana
purchase, even upon a larger scale and overshadowing all others in this
country. We may exclaim justly--Will there ever be another Exposition
greater and more important than the one just about to close?

"We seem to marvel at nothing in this progressive age. We always wonder
what other marvellous inventions may be in store for us to necessitate
another Exposition upon a gigantic scale, to be held somewhere in this
country. Perhaps within another decade, when the Isthmian canal is
finished, the golden stream which will connect the waters of the Pacific
and Atlantic oceans, we may celebrate at the national capital city the
greatest event of the twentieth century, bringing to the commerce of the
world peace and plenty. At the same time we may hope to celebrate the
establishment of our American merchant marine, the one thing needed to
carry our American products and goods into the harbors of the world,
floating the Stars and Stripes now so seldom witnessed upon the ocean
vessels. This country seems to forge ahead at a rapid pace, not only in
its material wealth, but in everything that tends to the happiness of
our people, even the humblest citizens sharing in the general
prosperity. Every section has cause to rejoice--the South with its
cotton, the North with its financial resources, the West with its farm
products, the East with its industries, all seem to participate in the
general welfare of the country. In conclusion let me thank you again for
the courtesy extended to our people, and we wish you great success in
this stupendous enterprise."

At the conclusion of Mr. Schieren's remarks the presiding officer said:
"For many years the _Brooklyn Times_ was owned and edited by the
late Mr. Bernard Peters. He was a man of strict integrity, high moral
ideals, and a forceful writer. The editorial chair of the _Times_
is now occupied by his son, Thomas P. Peters, a worthy son of a worthy
sire. Ladies and gentlemen, I take pleasure in introducing to you the
orator of the day, Mr. Thomas P. Peters."

Mr. Peters was greeted with hearty applause as he arose. His oration in
part follows:


ORATION OF MR. PETERS

"To speak a word for Brooklyn at this time, I was not the first choice
of the Committee of Arrangements. Unanimously that honor was assigned to
one of Brooklyn's favorite sons. But sickness of a most serious nature
overtook him only a few days ago, and after a brief illness, he was
early last Wednesday morning called to his final rest. Although upon
pleasure bent, our hearts are sorrowful because of this loss to
Brooklyn.

"Joseph C. Hendrix had been prominent in Brooklyn life a quarter of a
century, prominent enough to have been nominated at one time for mayor
of the old city by one of the great parties. He served Brooklyn for many
years as president of its board of education; was its postmaster, and
also represented one of its districts in the halls of Congress. Of
recent years he had withdrawn from public life and devoted himself to
the financial world. There he soon assumed a commanding position as bank
president, and his organizing abilities were constantly in demand. He
was one of Brooklyn's great men, and I regret that he is not here to-day
to fill the position for which he was so well fitted. Our borough is
rightly in deep bereavement because of the taking off of this, a
faithful servant.

"This party of Brooklynites has come over 1,000 miles to celebrate at
this magnificent exposition a day set apart for itself. We come not from
a sovereign State. Neither do we come from an independent city. We come
from but part of a great city. I will venture to claim that Brooklyn Day
at the St. Louis Exposition will be the only day set apart for any
municipal body holding a place by law of less dignity than that of a
city. Why, then, does Brooklyn send us out to make her name known here
and to extend her greetings to St. Louis? Because for years Brooklyn was
a city, and with more independent citizens to the total population than
were to be found in any other part of the known world, and she is still
true to her history. She had then a spirit that was the very
personification of municipal patriotism. She could tear down a dishonest
political rascal with greater celerity than any other city in the land.
She kept her two great parties equally balanced; each a foil to the
other, each a stimulant to the other for good government, and upon the
average she enjoyed better service than American cities usually obtain.

"It is almost seven years since Brooklyn lost her cityhood. During that
time she has been a dependent borough within the great city of New York.
Many thought that when that transition took place Brooklyn would lose
her old-time spirit, her pride would be humbled and she would sink into
the slough of despair, but we are here to-day to make known to these
United States that Brooklyn's old-time courage is as high, her spirit is
as heavily charged with municipal energy and her pride is the same pride
as of old.

"Brooklyn is a peculiar community. She differs from all others. The wits
have long fed upon her. General Horace Porter has called her a city of
4,000,000, 1,000,000 of whom are alive. Another has said that there are
two places to which every dead New Yorker goes, either to heaven or to
hades and to Brooklyn. He may escape one or the other of the two former.
He cannot escape the latter. Simeon Ford has declared that Brooklyn lies
midway between the quick and the dead, midway between reckless,
extravagant and wicked old New York and sober, sombre and serene
Greenwood. McKinley ran for President upon the issue of the full dinner
pail. The students of Princeton College recently asserted that Roosevelt
was running upon the issue of a full baby carriage. The President must
have secured his inspiration from the manner in which the cartoonists
always pictured the Brooklyn man, behind the perambulator. We ourselves
recognize that Brooklyn is peculiar and unusual. Her like is not known
to the world. That fact is proved to an extent by my former assertion,
that Brooklyn is the only community without municipal rank that will
have here a day of her own. The fact that we are here in body and that
she is here in spirit clearly shows that the old courage is still in her
heart. Brooklyn may be only a borough, she may be only an 'abutment for
bridges,' as President Littlejohn once feared she would become, but she
is to-day the same independent Brooklyn she was back in her cityhood,
and she is as proud of the things that make her great as many of the
cities of the things that make them merely flashy.

"Her former spirit lives; it lives because since consolidation Brooklyn
has assumed a commanding place in the councils of the greater city.
Brooklyn has chosen as her three borough presidents men of force, who
have been recognized as leaders by all the boroughs. At first the
borough government was a mockery of a government. It was only a
government in name. Our first president, Edward M. Grout, chafed under
its restraint. He demanded that the boroughs be allowed a voice in city
affairs, and that local improvements be given into the charge of borough
officials. To him the State Legislature listened, and his successor in
that office found himself with something beside the shadow of power, and
his administration was a marvel to Brooklyn in what it achieved. Other
boroughs looked on in envy, while J. Edward Swanstrom set a pace so
rapid that its like will be difficult to produce. Our first president,
Mr. Grout, became the comptroller in the second administration of the
greater city. The comptrollership of New York city is as important as
that of Secretary of the United States Treasury. Brooklyn was then and
is yet the dominant force in the life of the metropolis. The entire city
recognized Mr. Grout to be a man acquainted with even the minutest
details of the city's government. Brooklyn's place at the table of the
board of estimate was a commanding one with Swanstrom and Grout in their
seats, and to-day her representation there is equally good. Mr. Grout is
still there. In the place of Mr. Swanstrom sits Mr. Martin W. Littleton,
and by him the name of Brooklyn has been made famous from ocean to
ocean, and throughout the entire South, for in him Brooklyn has a
mouthpiece that thrills, and through him she speaks with a tongue of
eloquence.

"Since consolidation Brooklyn has been the second borough in point of
population and of wealth, but in statesmanship, in oratory and in
achievement she has stood pre-eminent. And while many believed that
after consolidation she would lose her independent spirit, she has
rather increased her old pride in herself, and this pride has been
fostered and strengthened because of the worthy sons who have
represented her in the government of the great city of New York, two of
whom we have brought with us, that St. Louis, at times herself deceived
by those she trusted, may look upon their like for once at least. Loyal
to Brooklyn have been Grout, Swanstrom and Littleton, and thus inspired,
has Brooklyn proved loyal to herself and faithful to her traditions.

"Brooklyn is a gigantic borough. She is three times as large as Buffalo,
the home of the Pan-American Exposition. She is twice as large as St.
Louis, the home of the present Exposition. Brooklyn territorially is
large enough and properly adapted to hold a population of 7,000,000, and
still remain less congested than the present borough of Manhattan.
Brooklyn is devoid of many of the characteristics that mark other great
cities. She is almost totally lacking in hotel life. A city of one-tenth
her population would have more hotels. But municipal greatness never
rested upon hotel life. It breeds corpulence, not courage. It
discourages the rearing of children, a thriving industry in Brooklyn.
Brooklyn has not the wealth in proportion to her size that she should
have. Brooklyn sat for long years under the shadow of old New York,
contributing to the wealth of the metropolis, but obtaining nothing in
return. Her population contributed to the real estate values upon
Manhattan island. Her factories and forges made many of the fortunes
that were spent across the East river. Only since consolidation have we
received any dividends upon that ever increasing investment. We now pay
$14,000,000 into the city treasury and take $17,000,000 out annually.
Brooklyn has often been described as the bedroom of old New York. The
description was apt, for Brooklyn has always been a city of homes, a
city of those of moderate means, a city of respectability. Brooklyn has
never been able to boast of her wealth, as other cities, nor has she had
to blush for her poverty and depravity as some other cities have.

"She has, however, been able to vaunt herself in the matter of those
things which by nature are companions of the home. She has always been
noted for her great churches, and has had the finest pulpit orators of
the day, and now she is as strong in that direction as she ever was in
the past. Her private schools have been known far and wide, while so
long as she controlled her public schools, they, too, stood extremely
high. Since consolidation they have fallen somewhat behind the march. In
dividing government among the boroughs, Mr. Grout achieved much. Where
the greatest good was done was where centralization was left with the
least sway. In school matters centralization rules absolutely, and to
that extent the schools have been forcibly drawn away from the people,
and the development has lain in the direction of complexity of
educational system, rather than in that of perfecting the children in
the rudiments of scholarship. Of late years we have taught our boys how
to sew, even if we did neglect their spelling. This increases the number
of special teachers, adds to the city's bills, but enables the school
superintendents to read splendid reports of new and special courses when
they attend pedagogic conventions. Your Exposition loaded New York's
educational authorities with medals and prizes and honorable mentions. I
would not censure you for this. No men ever worked harder for such
honors. The trouble is they work too hard over frills and neglect the
essentials. Were your judges to-day to hold an examination among our
grammar scholars upon the three subjects, reading, writing and
arithmetic, I am inclined to believe that you would send hurry orders
for the return of many of those prizes.

"In school matters Brooklyn is at a loss no further than are the other
boroughs of the greater city. She is at a loss because Mr. Grout's
advice was not taken. In short, we so highly prize our sewers, our
streets and our pavements that we directed that they be given directly
into our own charge and under our own borough president, and then we
held our children in such light esteem that we surrendered them into the
keeping of a centralized board of education, which is in turn in the
keeping of the board of superintendents, in which body Brooklyn has but
a small voice. It has reminded me of those people who personally care
for their own dogs and horses and leave their children to servants and
hired tutors. The system has been wrong. The wrong system has been made
top-heavy. The results have been poor.

"Brooklyn has developed the home life of America to a greater extent
than any other city has done. She has few palaces. She has few hovels.
She has a great army of American mothers and fathers that are bringing
up the next generation of men and women, and she is rearing them in
thousands of comfortable homes, where body develops with mind and where
the spiritual welfare is an important factor.

"Brooklyn has a park system of which she is proud to-day, and of which
she will grow prouder. In Prospect Park she has a jewel, in the very
heart of the community. In Forest Park she has a promise of great future
development. That new park lies upon high ground overlooking a vast
section of the borough and exhibiting to the eye the bay of Jamaica and
the ocean beyond. Forest Park is richly endowed by nature, and it will
in the days to come be in beauty above either Prospect or Central.
Brooklyn has great driveways leading to the ocean along her harbor front
and out into Long Island, and she has laid out many small parks and is
still engaged upon that work.

"In library matters Brooklyn to-day is well supplied. The system is most
extensive and has been rapidly developed. It is another indication of
what can be done when a department is decentralized. The Brooklyn Public
Library is under the control of Brooklyn men. The board of estimate
makes it an annual allowance. Andrew Carnegie gave to Brooklyn
$1,600,000 for library construction. With that money twenty branch
libraries are to be erected in time. Five are up; one is in operation.
To-day there are over twenty branch libraries; most of them are in
rented quarters, and they circulate over one million books a year among
the people.

"As another indication of the life of Brooklyn brief reference should be
made to the Institute of Arts and Sciences, the great college of those
beyond school years. It has been referred to as the intellectual bargain
counter of Brooklyn. It offers at very moderate prices literary,
historical, musical instruction and entertainment and lectures in all
the sciences. It is well supported, and the city is building it a
central building that will be the Mecca of the ambitious and the
cultured. No other city in the land supports such an institution, and it
is a great credit to us.

"Brooklyn's spirit is due in a great measure to the nature of the press
that caters to her. Her newspapers are intensely local in character.
They give to her institutions such support as is not given to the
institutions of any other city in the United States. It is this that has
encouraged an intelligent and independent breadth of mind in Brooklyn.
She keeps alive the old New England custom of a close watch over her
government and of a constant discussion of all public questions.
Englishmen are noted for their unremitting guard of their personal
rights. They are not to be compared in this with Brooklynites who, in
spite of a callous railroad system, still persist in demanding their
rights.

"Her press has called into being all over Brooklyn numerous boards of
trade and taxpayers' associations, and they, encouraged by the attention
given to them, devote themselves to their neighborhoods. Edmund Burke
referred to the journalists as a fourth estate. Aptly might we regard
these trade boards as a second government. Highly are they respected.
Many reforms, especially in transportation matters, have they achieved.

"I have outlined to you some of the features of Brooklyn life. She is in
truth the place where the home life of Greater New York is developed,
where it may be seen in its simple beauty adorned with its rugged
virtue. I have not boasted of her rich men, but of her intellectual
gifts; not of her social leaders, but of her clear-minded men and women;
not of her wealth, but of her mental attainments. It is from such a
community that we come to-day to write upon your visitors' book the name
of Brooklyn. In our way we are as proud of our homes as was the old
Roman matron of her two sons, although we may be as poorly decked with
tawdry jewels as she was. We are as proud of our independence in
politics as Philadelphia should be ashamed of her regularity. Boston is
credited with being the Athens of America. Brooklyn deserves the title,
but would leave to Boston her pedantic ways. We are sincere in our
speech and simple in our faith, and when we say we rejoice in St. Louis'
success, are glad to be here and are honored in having a day set aside
for us, we but echo the sentiments that our hearts suggest."

At the conclusion of the oration the Chairman introduced Henry Sanger
Snow, LL.D., who read the following original poem:


POEM OF DR. SNOW

                       I

  Hail! city of the West, from ocean's strand
    Afar we bring thee greeting. At thy gate,
  Wide-thrown in welcome, gathered nations stand
    And praise the deed ye grandly celebrate!
  The imperial star that rose from eastern seas,
    Marking the new-born nation in the West,
  Rides in _thy_ zenith now--by slow degrees
    The march of Empire takes its westward quest--
    And over scene more fair, sure star could never rest!

                      II

  Worthy thy festival of that high deed--
    Louisiana's treaty--greatest act
  Of all that came from our great Jefferson:
    Nor king nor statesman sealed a nobler pact!
  And worthy the _deed_ of this fair festival,
    When the young land whose life had scarce begun,
  With lofty courage doubt could ne'er appall,
    In the one act a finer victory won
    Than war in all her scarlet glory e'er hath done!

                      III

  An hundred years have passed--what wonders wrought
    Along the Mississippi's mighty stream!
  The changes time's transforming wand hath brought
    Seem but the unreal visions of a dream!
  Where stretched in vast expanse to western sea
    The pathless forest and the trackless plain,
  Great States and teeming millions soon should be,
    And orchards fair and fields of waving grain
    And every art of peace through that broad land should reign.

                      IV

  Hail to the Statesman whose far-seeing eyes
    Saw in the germ the nation that should be,
  Saw how a mighty empire should arise
    And span the continent from sea to sea,
  And building for the future, led the way
    With prescience and high courage, daring fate,
  An emperor's domain in a single day
    Bought for a purse of gold! a vast estate,
    From Europe's despot gained--to Freedom consecrate!

                      V

  Conquest of Peace! on thy triumphal day
    No mourning captives, chained to victor's car,
  Nor spoil of war, nor bloodshed marked thy way,
    Nor hate, nor wrong did thy escutcheon mar!
  No throng of armed hosts thy mountains crossed.
    Thy forests echoed to no battle cry,
  No glory gained with nation's honor lost,
    Nor victor's plaudit, echoed with a sigh.
    Louisiana won--nor any doomed to die!

                     VI

  Conquest of Peace! No Alsace here doth kneel,
    And Lorraine, scarred with unforgotten scar;
  No riven Poland, 'neath the warrior's heel,
    Spoil of the victor from the field of war.
  The sun that shines thy boundless plains along
    Lights not the smallest hamlet but is free;
  The winds that sweep thy mountains bear no song
    Save that the patriot sings--where Liberty
    And Peace and Law now are, and evermore shall be!

                    VII

  So be it ever, through the coming age
    Our nation's destiny shall be fulfilled,
  Not by the tears that greed or passion wage,
    Not by the blood of foes or brethren spilled!
  But in the wiser and the nobler way
    The patriot Statesman taught us, when of yore
  His victory of Peace in one brief day
    Won glory greater than a year of war!
    So may it be, dear land, with thee for evermore!


At the conclusion of the exercises the benediction was pronounced by the
Reverend Doctor Wintner, of Brooklyn, New York, in the following words:

"May the Lord our God, Creator of the universe and Father of mankind,
bless all those in our home city afar off, and also those near here, and
may He look down upon you in His kindness and grace, and grant you peace
forevermore. Amen."


THE LUNCHEON

Immediately after the formal exercises, the delegation were guests of
the State Commission at luncheon, at which Commissioner William Berri
presided. Covers were laid for about 200. At the conclusion of the
luncheon toasts were responded to by several. The program of remarks
follows:

  "A Welcome to the Fair,"
        Honorable David R. Francis, President of the Louisiana
        Purchase Exposition

  "The Old Brooklynites,"
        Ex-Senator Stephen M. Griswold
        "'Tis the sunset of life gives us mystical lore."

  "Brooklyn of the Future"
        Dr. Henry Sanger Snow
        "There is a fascination in recollections of the past and
        hopes for the future."

  "Brooklyn Women"
        Judge Hiram R. Steele
        "Woman! Blest partner of our joys and woes."


THE COMMITTEES

The local Brooklyn committee was as follows: President, Martin W.
Littleton; Secretary, John B. Creighton.

Executive Committee: Herbert F. Gunnison, Robert W. Haff, Timothy L.
Woodruff, Julian D. Fairchild, J. Edward Swanstrom, S.F. Rothschild,
James J. McCabe, Frank E. O'Reilly, John N. Harman and Thomas P. Peters.

Entertainment Committee: Thomas P. Peters, James J. McCabe, James
McLeer, Robert W. Haff and Timothy L. Woodruff.

Program Committee: J. Edward Swanstrom, Julian D. Fairchild and S.F.
Rothschild.

Transportation Committee: Herbert F. Gunnison, Frank E. O'Reilly and
William Berri.


THE EVENING RECEPTION

The New York City building on the Model street, in which the evening
reception was held, was elaborately decorated with colored lights, the
word "Brooklyn" appearing in fairy lamps over the main doorway. Within a
wealth of palms and smilax was used.

The reception took place between eight and ten and was attended by the
Brooklyn delegation, Exposition officials, State and national
representatives and many invited guests. An orchestra furnished music
and throughout the evening a buffet luncheon was served. The receiving
line consisted of Thomas W. Hynes, Commissioner for New York city, and
Mrs. Hynes; Vice-President Berri, of the State Commission, and Mrs.
Berri; Colonel William Hester; Mr. and Mrs. J. Edward Swanstrom; Mr. and
Mrs. R.W. Haff; Mr. and Mrs. Thomas P. Peters; Mr. John B. Creighton;
Mr. and Mrs. Clarence W. Seamans; Dr. and Mrs. Henry Sanger Snow; Mr.
and Mrs. Hiram R. Steele; Mr. and Mrs. Stephen M. Griswold; Mr. and Mrs.
J. Adolph Mollenhauer; Mr. and Mrs. J. H. Raymond; Mr. Herbert F.
Gunnison.

The exercises of the day were marked by an enthusiasm which invariably
characterizes the undertakings of Brooklynites, and the large delegation
which had journeyed all the way from home to spend four short days at
the Fair felt more than repaid for the journey.

[Illustration: CYNGALESE STICK DANCERS]



CHAPTER VIII

Thanksgiving Day

[Illustration]


The fact that the Exposition did not close until December first
compelled all employees to remain in St. Louis Thanksgiving Day; that
day which, of all others, generally marks a family gathering. The
Commission thoughtfully extended an invitation to all of its employees
and their families in St. Louis to be their guests at Thanksgiving
dinner in the State building. The number included about sixty-five
people, every attache who was in town accepting the invitation.

The official colony of the Empire State at the great Exposition
assembled at the State building at one o'clock. All were cordially
greeted by Vice-President Berri, Mrs. Berri and Mrs. Norman E. Mack.
Before sitting down to dinner a group picture was taken on the front
steps of the building, a copy of which was subsequently presented by the
Commission to each employee.

The table was set in the grand hall and was heavily laden with products
of the State of New York. Owing to the approaching close of the
Exposition, the agricultural and horticultural exhibits were heavily
drawn upon. Great heaps of New York's superlative fruit and prize
vegetables were used in decorating the table. Messrs. Bayno & Pindat
served a tempting menu, features of which were those dishes always
associated with Thanksgiving Day--roast turkey and pumpkin pie. A spirit
of hearty good fellowship pervaded the entire occasion, and each one
vied with his neighbor in adding to the total of the entertainment.

Remarks were made between the courses, and early in the event
Vice-President Berri, who presided, arose and, after complimenting every
one present on behalf of the Commission for the part they had taken in
contributing to New York's success at the Fair, proceeded in a most
happy vein and said in part, as follows:


REMARKS BY MR. BERRI

"We should be thankful way down deep in our hearts that we are citizens
of such a great country--the United States of America. When you think of
its wonderful struggle for years and know that to-day it is at the
forefront of progress among the nations of the earth should we not be
thankful that we are a part of it? We should be thankful that we have
such a great President--a man respected by all nations. Republicans
should be thankful that they won such a great victory at the polls, and
Democrats should be thankful that the Republicans give them such good
government.

"The married men here should be thankful that they have such good wives,
and the wives that they have such good husbands; the unmarried men that
they have in the future such a vista of happiness that is to come to
them, and the young ladies should be thankful that there are so many
young men around. There is no way to view this occasion but with a
thanksgiving spirit, and nothing pleases me more than to be with you
to-day. There has been no feature of our Fair at any time, in all of its
various functions we have had, that gives me such great pleasure as to
preside at this gathering. It is the first time we have been all brought
together, and, while the hours of the Fair are numbered, I am sure that
every one will go home never forgetting the pleasant days they have had
at the great Exposition at St. Louis in the year nineteen hundred and
four."

He then called upon Mrs. Norman E. Mack, the only other member of the
Commission present. Mrs. Mack was warmly applauded and said:


RESPONSE BY MRS. MACK

"It gives me great pleasure to be able to take my Thanksgiving dinner
to-day with so many who have done so much for the glory of New York at
this Exposition. I particularly wish to compliment those of our own
building who have always been so courteous and nice to me, and by so
doing have aided the New York Commission in making the New York State
building the social center of the Exposition."


OTHER SPEAKERS

Brief remarks were also made by Mr. J. H. Durkee, Superintendent of
Agriculture; Mr. DeLancey M. Ellis, Director of Education and Social
Economy; Mr. James T. Patterson, Assistant Superintendent of
Horticulture; Mr. A. B. Strough, in charge of the Forestry, Fish and
Game exhibit; Dr. H. H. Hinshaw, in charge of the Scientific exhibit,
and the following officials of the State building: Hon. Frank J.
LeFevre, Superintendent; Mrs. Dore Lyon, Hostess; Mrs. F. P. Applebee,
Assistant Hostess; Miss Laura C. MacMartin, Matron, and Mr. George B.
Cowper, Assistant Superintendent. Others present were called upon and
made appropriate remarks, and the Pikers' Club, an organization composed
of attaches of the building, furnished the musical part of the
entertainment.


PRESENTATION TO SECRETARY BALL

Vice-President Berri then presented Mr. Charles A. Ball, Secretary and
Chief Executive Officer of the Commission, with a complete fishing
outfit in behalf of all of the employees of the New York State
Commission. Mr. Ball enjoys a wide reputation as an expert with the rod.
In his remarks Mr. Berri said that it had never been demonstrated that
the Secretary had ever returned with any fish, and expressed the hope
that with such a perfect equipment some tangible results might be shown.
He also humorously referred to the fact that in the fire which a short
time before had threatened the destruction of the State building, Mr.
Ball's first thought had been for the safety of his fishing reels. The
presentation was a complete surprise to the Secretary, who feelingly
expressed his deep appreciation of the thoughtfulness of his staff in
making him a present which he should treasure as long as he lived. He
also expressed his gratitude to all of the employees of the Commission
for their loyal support, which had meant so much in the successful
participation of New York at the greatest Fair the world ever knew. He
closed with laudatory remarks concerning the Commission, and the wisdom
and thoroughness which had characterized its work.

In the course of her remarks Mrs. Lyon read the following original poem:


POEM BY MRS. LYON

  Like ships upon the changing sea of life,
    Unknowing and unknown until we met,
  We've sailed awhile together, and no strife
    Has marred our joy, nor brought a faint regret.

  O'er this composite family of ours,
    Begotten from each corner of our State,
  Has breathed a peaceful spirit, and the hours
    Have sped on wings from early dawn till late.

  'Tis something to have met each other here,
    And found in each some trait to be admired,
  And felt the world replete with joy and cheer,
    And friendship still the thing to be desired.

  The tiny corners that we once possessed
    By gentle contact have been rubbed away,
  And words that might have hurt have been suppressed,
    And peacefully we hail this Festive Day.

  The time when we must part comes on apace,
    And soon we'll wend along our various ways,
  Then mem'ry's realm will crowded be for space
    To welcome friends of Exposition days.

  To name each one and strive to pay the debt
    We owe, of deepest gratitude and praise
  In words, would take me many hours yet,
    And possibly run over into days.

  And--after all, when all is said and done,
    It only means we've met--to live--to part.
  Then here's my wish--That we have just begun
    A friendship which may blossom in each heart.


LANTERN SLIDES

At the conclusion of the remarks a series of lantern slides illustrating
some of the most attractive natural features of the Empire State were
shown, the slides being a part of the exhibit in education. The
entertainment concluded with informal dancing, music for the same being
furnished by an orchestra which was in attendance. The assemblage
dispersed with three rousing cheers for the Empire State and for the
Louisiana Purchase Exposition Commission of the State of New York.

[Illustration: SIOUX CHIEF "BLUE HORSE" AND ARMY OFFICERS]



CHAPTER IX

Educational Exhibit and Schedule of Awards


THE EDUCATIONAL EXHIBIT

BY DELANCEY M. ELLIS

Director of Education and Social Economy

[Illustration]



The movement for an educational exhibit of the State of New York at St.
Louis was inaugurated at a meeting of the State Teachers' Association,
held at Saratoga in July, 1902, at which a resolution was offered
inviting the various educational associations of the State to co-operate
with the above association in promoting an exhibit commensurate with the
State's educational importance. An immediate response was forthcoming.


THE CONFERENCE COMMITTEE

Ten powerful educational associations and the two State administrative
departments (since merged into the Department of Education) each sent a
delegate to a central committee, which took the name of "Conference
Committee," and consisted of Chairman, Myron T. Scudder, principal State
Normal School, New Paltz, representing the Normal Principals' Council;
Secretary, Henry L. Taylor, representing the University of the State of
New York; A. M. Wright, Second Deputy Superintendent of Public
Instruction, representing the Department of Public Instruction; F. D.
Boynton, superintendent of schools, Ithaca, representing the State
Teachers' Association; Andrew W. Edson, associate superintendent of
schools, city of New York, representing the Council of School
Superintendents; Calvin W. Edwards, president Board of Education,
Albany, representing the Association of School Boards; F. S. Fosdick,
principal Masten Park High School, Buffalo, representing the Associated
Academic Principals; George H. Walden, principal Grammar School No. 10,
Rochester, representing the Council of Grammar School Principals; H. J.
Schmitz, acting principal State Normal School, Geneseo, representing the
Science Teachers' Association; A. C. Hill, Department of Public
Instruction, representing the Training Teachers' Conference; Erwin B.
Whitney, school commissioner, first district, Broome county,
representing the School Commissioners and Superintendents' Association.

This Committee organized as above in October, 1902, and appointed a
subcommittee to appear before the Louisiana Purchase Exposition
Commission and request an adequate appropriation and the appointment of
a director to carry on the work.


APPOINTMENT OF DIRECTOR

At the Meeting of the Commission held June 10, 1903, DeLancey M. Ellis,
of Rochester, was appointed director, and the sum of $20,000 was set
aside for the preparation of the educational exhibit. Offices were
immediately opened at 46 Elwood building, Rochester, N. Y., and the work
of collecting and preparing the exhibit material was begun. As the
schools were just about to close for the summer holidays but little
could be accomplished, and none of the work of the school year 1902-1903
could be procured. It is to be regretted that time was not allowed to
procure an exhibit of work covering an entire school year. That which
covers a shorter period is of necessity fragmentary and hardly conveys
clearly an idea of the quality or scope of the work being done in a
given institution.


ADVISORY COMMITTEE

The Conference Committee was invited to retain its organization and to
take the name of "Advisory Committee," to co-operate with and assist the
director, the members of the committee to serve without compensation,
but necessary expenses while in discharge of their duties to be paid
from the appropriation for the exhibit.

It would be hard to overestimate the services performed by this
committee. Each member took a hearty interest in the work in hand and
freely gave of his time and advice in carrying the work forward to a
successful conclusion. Any lack of interest or enthusiasm on the part of
the members of a given association was quickly dispelled by a personal
appeal to its members from its representative upon the committee. In
this way the interest was most genuine and general throughout the State,
and in no way could the sentiment of educational interests be more
clearly crystallized than in a meeting of this committee, and to them is
due the thanks of the Commission, as well as the thanks of the
educational forces of the State of New York for their unselfish efforts
and wise counsel, which in so large a way was responsible for the
success of the educational exhibit.


PLANS PRESENTED BEFORE EDUCATIONAL ASSOCIATIONS

The director was invited to present the plans for the exhibit at the
following educational meetings during the year 1903: University
Convocation, at Albany, in June; State Teachers' Association, at Cliff
Haven, in July; School Commissioners and Superintendents, at Watkins, in
September; Association of Superintendents, which met in conjunction with
the Massachusetts Association of Superintendents, at Boston, in October,
and Associated Academic Principals, at Syracuse in December. The subject
was cordially received, and a general effort was made throughout the
field of education in the Empire State to prepare an exhibit which would
surpass any that had ever been gathered before. By means of circulars,
several of which were sent broadcast throughout the State, full
instructions were given to local authorities as to the preparation of
the work, amount of material desired and the proposed plan of
arrangement. Throughout the fall and winter the director visited many
cities of the State, consulted with exhibitors as to the most attractive
way of preparing material, and held himself in readiness to assist all
who experienced any difficulty in the preparation of their exhibits. The
exhibit material was collected, systematically arranged and mounted at
the offices in Rochester, the entire expense of its preparation and
transportation being borne by the State, with the exception of the
binding of written work and small incidental expenses, which were borne
by the local school authorities.


LOCATION OF THE EXHIBIT

The space assigned to the State of New York contained approximately
2,300 square feet and was most advantageously located. It was directly
within and facing the main north entrance of the Palace of Education,
and at the intersection of the main north and south aisle and transverse
aisle "B." For its neighbors were the city of St. Louis and the State of
Missouri, both of which prepared most meritorious exhibits; and the
State of Massachusetts, which is always looked upon as standing in the
front rank in educational progress.

The Exposition authorities announced that no unit smaller than the State
in public school exhibits would be recognized, except in the case of
four or five cities which had powerful, strongly centralized school
systems, making them worthy of independent space and proper subjects for
individual study.


EXHIBIT OF THE CITY OF NEW YORK

The city of New York was numbered among these exceptions, and
approximately 1,500 square feet of space was assigned it adjoining the
space assigned to the State of New York. The city government
appropriated $10,000 for its exhibit and bore the entire expense of the
same. Associate Superintendent Andrew W. Edson was named as committee in
charge of the exhibit by Superintendent William H. Maxwell. The city
authorities early expressed a willingness and desire to co-operate with
the State authorities in the preparation of an exhibit and agreed to
follow the same general style of installation and arrangement. Due
acknowledgment is hereby made to Superintendent Maxwell, Associate
Superintendent Edson and to committees in charge of minor details for
the adoption of plans already inaugurated in the preparation of the
State exhibit, and to C. B. J. Snyder, superintendent of school
buildings in the city of New York, who prepared the plans for the booth
for both the State and city exhibits at no expense to the State.


THE INSTALLATION

The booth was so planned that from the outside it was apparently a
single inclosure, the State and city exhibits being separated on the
interior by an appropriate screen nine feet high, through which an
entranceway was cut. Mr. Snyder's plans provided for a scheme of
installation which, while inexpensive, was both artistic and dignified
and admirably adapted for the display of the material to be exhibited.
In fact it was generally conceded that much more effective results had
been obtained than by surrounding states which had expended considerably
more money. The inclosure was massive, the woodwork being an effective
imitation of Flemish oak, and the hanging surface a burlap of a neutral
green tint; the facade, sixteen feet in height, being broken every few
feet at fixed intervals by fluted pilasters with ornamental caps. On the
outside a wainscoting extended three feet from the floor, above which
were panels for hanging exhibit material, the whole being capped by an
attractive dentulated cornice. The entranceway, which was thrown across
the corner at the intersection of the aisles, was a massive arch,
surmounted by the coat of arms of the State, tinted in old ivory,
underneath which in gold letters was, "State of New York." The interior
was cut by transverse walls, nine feet high and extending seven feet
from the main wall, thus forming a series of alcoves convenient for
study on the part of visitors and leaving in the center an open space
for the display of models, apparatus and cabinet material. Directly
facing the entranceway were general and private offices. Completely
surrounding the interior of the booth, on the eye line, were 100 wall
cabinets which have come to be so generally used for the display of
exhibit material. The wall space above the cabinets was used for the
display of especially meritorious and attractive material, while below
was a countershelf upon which, here and there, rested a showcase for the
display of sewing, clay modeling, botanical specimens, etc. Underneath
the counters were shelves for bound books and cupboards for the storage
of printed matter and supplies. All work was mounted uniformly upon a
Scotch gray cardboard and neatly lettered in white ink.


SCOPE OF THE EXHIBIT

Instead of confining the exhibit to the work of the public schools, as
was quite generally done by other States exhibiting, it was decided to
show, so far as possible, work now being done in all forms and phases of
education in the Empire State. Space was freely given to private
institutions to demonstrate the place which they are filling in the
educational work of the State. Every subdivision of the official
classification found an exemplification within the New York State
exhibit. The participation of twenty-four cities and numerous
incorporated villages, both in elementary and high school work, made the
exhibits of those departments thoroughly representative of the work of
the State as a whole. It is unfair to pick the work of a few progressive
school systems, and endeavor to make it stand for the work of the State
at large.


PLAN OF ARRANGEMENT

The plan of arrangement was arrived at only after the most careful
thought and discussion, the desire being to so arrange the material as
to be most serviceable to the educator and to those seeking suggestions
and helpful ideas. In arranging an educational exhibit, emphasis must be
placed either upon political divisions, subjects or grades. It was early
determined that no separate space should be assigned to any single
locality, but that all of the work of the State in the grades should be
exhibited grade by grade and that of the high schools by subjects, and
arranged under various departments, such as science, classics,
mathematics, etc., thus making it possible for a grade teacher to
readily compare her work with that of New York's, and to profit by the
comparison, no matter in whose favor it might be, and a high school
instructor in charge of a department to readily find the work of that
department. This method rendered it unnecessary to look over the
exhibits from several cities to find the particular work desired.
Moreover, a further subdivision was made, in that the work was arranged
according to the population of the contributing cities and villages.
That is, the work from the city of the largest population contributing
was installed first, and so on in order. While it was not the purpose to
invite comparison of work between rival cities of the State, but rather
to present a united front to the world at large, still if it was the
desire of some to make such comparison, the above indicated arrangement
was the most equitable, as all cities of approximately the same
resources and theoretically working under like conditions were placed
side by side, and the work of the small village was not placed in
juxtaposition with that of the large, strongly centralized city system
with many times its resources. A complete catalogue of the exhibit was
freely distributed, and cross-references made to work of the various
localities, so there was no difficulty for those interested in a single
place to locate the work it contributed.

It was generally conceded that, while the above arrangement made no
concession to local pride, it was by all odds the wisest arrangement to
follow in an exposition of international scope. The compliments which
were bestowed upon the arrangement of the exhibit, and the readiness
with which all visitors found the work in which they were particularly
interested, demonstrated beyond a doubt the wisdom of the committee in
pursuing the course above outlined. The entire exhibit was also
carefully classified in harmony with the official classification of the
Exposition under the several groups and subdivisions thereof, thereby
rendering additional aid in promptly locating exhibits in any particular
department.


EXHIBIT DIVISIONS

Entering the booth one found to the left of the entrance the exhibit of
the former State Department of Public Instruction. (It should be stated
here that the exhibits of the University of the State of New York and of
the State Department of Public Instruction were prepared before
unification was an accomplished fact. The two exhibits can be said to
have formed the exhibit of the new Department of Education.)

Next was the exhibit of the kindergartens, filling three units. (The
term "unit" is used to designate one of the wall cabinets containing
thirty-three cards 22 x 28 inches.)

Adjoining the kindergarten section was the exhibit of the elementary
grades, filling twenty-five units. All the subjects of the curriculum
were shown, the work in the wall cabinets being "types" or "samples" of
work, the great bulk of which was shown in bound volumes.
Cross-reference was made on the margin of each card to the volume
containing similar work, thus facilitating the search of the visitor for
a number of class exercises of work of the same general nature, and
relieving the visitor interested in a general way of looking over a vast
repetition of material. Separating the elementary grades from the high
schools was the exhibit of the rural schools of the State, those schools
under the jurisdiction of the several school commissioners. It was most
complete and interesting, and afforded a clear picture of the work done
in the ungraded country schools. The exhibit of the high schools,
filling fourteen units, was next in order, and, as stated above, was
subdivided into subjects. Twenty-four cities of the State, to say
nothing of the incorporated villages, private institutions, etc.,
contributed material in one or more of the foregoing departments.

Next was installed the exhibit covering the professional training of
teachers, equally divided between the State Normal School system and the
work of the training schools and classes in cities and villages, each
occupying five units. Every Normal School of the State was represented,
each making a special exhibit in the particular subject or subjects
assigned it by a committee of Normal School principals, to whom was
delegated the duty of preparing an exhibit. All of the city training
schools in the State, save four, were represented, as well as the great
majority of training classes, the whole exhibit having been arranged by
the State Supervisor of Training Schools and Classes.

In the next section was installed the exhibit in higher education,
exhibits being in place from Colgate University, Hobart College,
Manhattan College, the College of Pharmacy--allied with Columbia
University--and Syracuse University, the latter institution making an
exhibit both in applied sciences and in fine arts. Next were installed
the exhibits of technical and trade schools, which contained interesting
displays from the leading institutions in the State engaged in this line
of work. Just beyond was the exhibit of the industrial schools, and then
the display of special work in education which is being done by
institutions not wholly educational in character. A unique unit was that
devoted to the work of the Indian schools of the State, each of the
several reservations being represented, and the whole exhibit being
arranged by the State Inspector of Indian Schools.

The next alcove was devoted to the education of defectives. It contained
concise exhibits from the institutions of the State devoted to the
instruction of the deaf, dumb and blind, and was carefully studied by
those engaged in this work.

The exhibit of summer schools and extension courses adjoined this and
was designed to show the work which is best exemplified by the
Chautauqua institution. In a manner allied with this work is that of the
Education Department in visual instruction, which is carried on by
lantern slides to aid in the teaching of geography, history and kindred
subjects. It was, therefore, installed under this head. The exhibit
received hearty commendation from educators generally, but particularly
from foreign visitors. The scheme is thoroughly practicable, and nowhere
else is it carried on with the same careful attention to detail, nor is
the same perfection of slide making reached as in the State of New York.

The last exhibit before leaving the booth was that of the University of
the State of New York.


SPECIAL FEATURES

There were many features of special interest. A series of thirty-two
charts were prepared as the special exhibit of the New York State
Teachers' Association, and will be reproduced in the forthcoming report
of that body. To one interested in following the tremendous progress
made in every branch of educational activity within our State during the
past decade, these charts are invaluable. The two charts here reproduced
and which formed a part of the exhibit of the Department of Public
Instruction were the subject of much comment.

The model of the new State Normal and Training School at Fredonia, which
was prepared by the manual training and art classes of the institution,
came in for its share of attention. It was an accurate model of one of
the State's finest educational structures.

The State Normal School at New Paltz sent a doll house made by the
seventh grade boys for the first grade children in the practice
department, the entire structure being completely furnished and
appointed by the children.

A special feature was the exhibit of clay modeling from the State School
of Clay Working and Ceramics at Alfred, the only school of its kind in
the United States receiving State aid. Near by stood a cabinet full of
home-made apparatus sent from various institutions, but a large part of
which came from the physical laboratories of Pratt Institute, Brooklyn.
The exhibit contained much of interest to a science teacher.

On the exterior of the facade was a huge educational map of the State,
upon which was shown the location, grade, construction and normal
capacity of every institution of learning within its borders. The
superiority of New York's schoolhouses was shown by the large number
constructed of brick and stone. The year 1904 marked the passing of the
log schoolhouse, only four of which were shown upon the map as against
approximately fifty ten years ago. The facade also contained an
admirable exhibit of art work prepared by the students of the New York
School of Applied Design for Women.


SIGNIFICANCE OF SOME CITY EXHIBITS

Various methods of instruction peculiar to certain cities or localities
were fully set forth. Albany exhibited the work of one of the most
complete systems of free kindergartens in the country, as well as the
correlation of subjects in the elementary grades; also manual training
and art courses in the high school. Batavia demonstrated the system of
individual instruction as carried on in its schools, which involves the
employment of two teachers in each classroom. Syracuse exemplified its
courses in art, manual training and physical training in the elementary
grades. Jamestown clearly set forth its course in manual training
throughout the entire school course, while Ithaca, in addition to a
well-rounded exhibit, by means of photographs, brought out the subject
of high school athletics. The exhibit from Yonkers, which was general in
character, portrayed the efficiency and superiority of the school
equipment in that city.


EDITORIAL COMMENT

The exhibit from first to last demonstrated beyond peradventure the
beneficial results accruing from a strongly centralized, and, at the
same time, most liberal administration of educational interests.

A prominent morning daily paper, commenting editorially upon the
exhibit, says: "It is worth your attention; it means more to every
citizen of the Empire State than any other exhibit shown. The chief
product of the Empire State is men; neither fields of grain or
manufactures, invention or art are as important a product as men. In New
York State are produced some of the greatest men of the country. A large
part of the raw material comes into New York harbor past 'Liberty
Enlightening the World,' and is gradually converted into citizenship.
... Some of the raw material imported is next to worthless; some of the
domestic stuff is equally unpromising, but in the great bulk, year in
and year out, there is the making of fine men. ... New York State men
are scattered throughout the country. They found the cities of the west;
they run the railroads; they manipulate the finances; they capitalize
the new enterprises; they invest in the futures; they get into the
public offices; they plan the political campaigns; they produce the new
ideas; they center current history. Men are made in New York State in
the schools. ... The better the schools the finer the quality of the men
produced. Therefore, the school exhibit of New York State should
interest every citizen, as the schools have been bettering year by year
and the product increasing in value. ... The Commission in charge of
this exhibit has spared no expense to make this educational showing a
storehouse of novel ideas and suggestions dealing with the advance in
pedagogy, and of the State's resources in the teaching of the young
idea."


DISPOSITION OF MATERIAL

Many requests were received from the representatives of foreign
governments, agents of pedagogical museums and individuals for portions
of the exhibit, but the determination of the Lewis and Clark Exposition
Commission of the State of New York to send the entire exhibit to the
Exposition at Portland, Oregon, precluded the possibility of acceding to
these requests and insures the holding intact of the entire exhibit
throughout the Portland Exposition period, at the conclusion of which it
is to be hoped that provision will be made for the establishment of a
Pedagogical Museum at the Capitol in Albany, of which this exhibit may
be made the nucleus.


ITEMS OF EXPENDITURE

The appropriation of $20,000 was expended approximately, as follows

Installation: Booth, wall cabinets, furniture, etc.    $6,000
Salary of Director and assistants and maintenance
  at St. Louis -----------------------------------      8,500
Freight, express, cartage, telegrams, etc. -------      1,000
Material used in preparation and general supplies       2,700
Traveling expenses -------------------------------      1,250
Printing and stationery --------------------------        350
Expenses of Advisory Committee -------------------        200
                                                      -------
Total --------------------------------------------    $20,000
                                                      =======


THE STAFF

The Director acknowledges the loyalty and efficiency of those associated
with him in the work of the department. To them belongs a large share of
any credit which may be forthcoming for the value of the exhibit.

In an educational exhibit, probably more than any other, the necessity
of a personal explanation to supplement the work exhibited is necessary.
Miss Olive C. Kellogg, of New York city, and Miss Clara M. Paquet, of
Cohoes, expert attendants, were always ready to explain the work
exhibited, and to give full information concerning the distinctive
features of the various city systems and institutions. They spoke the
principal foreign languages, thus aiding visitors from abroad in more
easily grasping the ideas set forth and the methods exemplified.

Miss Mary MacArthur, of Rochester, N.Y., served throughout the period of
preparation and through the Exposition period as general assistant and
stenographer; Hugh J. Kelly, of Albany, N.Y., as assistant and clerk,
and E.J. Haddleton and H.B. Skinner, of Albany, as expert letterers and
draftsmen.


_Catalogue of Exhibitors in the Department of Education, Arranged by
Groups, with the Awards, if Any, Received by Each_


GROUP ONE

_Kindergartens, Elementary Education, and Training of Teachers for
Same_

Albany, Board of Education, public schools. Gold medal
    Administrative blanks
    Forty-one volumes class exercises
    Photographs
    Course of study in drawing and drawings
Ballston, Board of Education, training class. Collective award,
      gold medal
    Students' written work
Batavia, Board of Education, public schools. Gold medal
    Eight volumes pupils' work
    Photographs
    Charts
    Pamphlets
Cambridge, Board of Education, training class
    Photographs
Canajoharie, Board of Education, public schools
    Pupils' selected work
Canajoharie, Board of Education, training class
    Students' written work
Canton, Board of Education
    Administrative blanks
    Photographs
Cape Vincent, Board of Education, public school
    Three volumes pupils' written work
Cato, Board of Education, public school
    One volume pupils' written work
Cattaraugus, Board of Education, training class. Collective award,
      gold medal
    Students' written work
Clayton, Board of Education, training class. Collective award,
      gold medal
    Students' written work
    Two volumes drawings
Clyde, Board of Education, training class. Collective award, gold
      medal
    Students' selected work
Cohoes, Board of Education, public schools
    Pupils' drawings
Colton, Board of Education, training class. Collective award, gold
      medal
    Students' selected work
Corinth, Board of Education, public schools
    Six volumes of pupils' written work
    Photographs
Corinth, Board of Education, training class. Collective award, gold
      medal
    Students' written work
Cortland, Board of Education, public schools
    Photographs
    Administrative blanks
    Pupils' selected work
    Annual report
Depew, Board of Education, public schools
    Six industrial charts
DeRuyter, Board of Education, teachers' training class. Collective
      award, gold medal
    Students' written work
East Aurora, Board of Education, public schools
    Six volumes pupils' written work.
    Catalogues
Education, State Department of. Grand prize
    Charts
    Statistics
    Administrative blanks
    Reports
    Maps
    Lantern slides
    Publications illustrating visual instruction system
Fairport, Board of Education, training class. Collective award, gold
      medal
    Students' written work
Freeport, Board of Education, public schools
    Three volumes pupils' written work
Froebel Normal Institute, New York city. Silver medal
    One volume catalogues
    Photographs
    Students' written work
    Administrative blanks
    Kindergarten songs
Glens Falls, Board of Education, training class. Collective award,
      gold medal
    Students' written work
Gouverneur, Board of Education, training class. Collective award,
      gold medal
    Students' written work
Griffith Institute, Springville, Board of Education, training class.
      Collective award, gold medal
    Students' written work
Hamilton, Board of Education, training class. Collective award,
      gold medal
    Students' written work
Herkimer, Board of Education, public schools
    Pupils' selected work
Hornellsville, Board of Education, training class. Collective award,
      gold medal
    Students' work
Hudson, Board of Education, public schools
    One volume pupils' work in penmanship
Ithaca, Board of Education, public schools. Gold medal
    Sixteen volumes pupils' written work
    Sloyd work
    Administrative blanks
    Photographs
Jamestown, Board of Education, public schools. Silver medal
    Nineteen volumes pupils' written work
    Statistical charts
    Cabinet of manual training work
    Administrative blanks
    Photographs
Johnstown, Board of Education, public schools. Collective award,
      gold medal
    Six volumes pupils' written work
    Industrial charts
    Annual report
Johnstown, Board of Education, training class
    Students' written work
Kingston, Board of Education, public schools. Collective award,
      gold medal
    Seven volumes pupils' written work
    Drawings
    Photographs
Little Falls, Board of Education, public schools
    Pupils' selected work
Malone, Board of Education, training class. Collective award, gold
      medal
    Students' written work
Map, Educational map of New York State
    (See award to Louisiana Purchase Exposition Commission)
Mechanicville, Board of Education, public schools
    Six volumes pupils' written work
Medina, Board of Education, public schools
    Six volumes pupils' written work
    Map drawing and relief maps
Mexico, Board of Education, training class
    Students' written work
Mohawk, Board of Education, public school
    Four volumes pupils' written work
Newark, Board of Education, public schools
    One volume pupils' written work
    Catalogues and administrative blanks
New Rochelle, Board of Education, public schools. Collective
      award, gold medal
    Eighteen volumes pupils' written work
    Drawings
    Photographs
North Collins, Board of Education, training class. Collective award,
      gold medal
    Students' written work
Norwich, Board of Education, training class. Collective award,
      gold medal
    Students' written work
Nunda, Board of Education, training class. Collective award, gold
      medal
    Students' written work
Ogdensburg, Board of Education, public schools
    Four volumes pupils' written work
    Drawings
    Administrative blanks
Ogdensburg, Board of Education, training class. Collective award,
      gold medal
    Students' written work
Oneida, Board of Education, public schools
    Seven volumes pupils' written work
    One volume annual reports
    Administrative blanks
Oneida, Board of Education, training class. Collective award, gold
      medal
    Students' written work
Onondaga, Board of Education, academy
    Pupils' nature study work
Phelps, Board of Education, public schools
    Five volumes pupils' written work
Phoenix, Board of Education, training class. Collective award, gold
      medal
    Students' written work
Port Byron, Board of Education, public school
    One volume pupils' written work
Port Henry, Board of Education, public schools
    One volume pupils' written work
Port Henry, Board of Education, training class. Collective award,
      gold medal
    Students' written work
Port Jervis, Board of Education, union school
    Drawings
    Administrative blanks
Port Leyden, Board of Education, union school
    Two volumes pupils' written work
    Photographs
Public Instruction, State Department of
    (See award to Louisiana Purchase Exposition Commission)
    Administrative blanks
    Pamphlets
    Charts
    Statistics
    Publications
    Fifty-six volumes, report of superintendent
Pulaski, Board of Education, training class. Collective award, gold
      medal
    Students' work
Richfield Springs, Board of Education, training class. Collective
      award, gold medal
    Students' written work
Rochester, plan of Clifford street embellishment
Rural schools: Collective exhibit from following counties
    Broome county. Collective award, gold medal
      Pupils' written work
      Photographs
    Cattaraugus county. Collective award, gold medal
      Pupils' written work
      Photographs
    Chautauqua county. Collective award, gold medal
      Pupils' written work
      Photographs
    Chenango county. Collective award, gold medal
      Pupils' written work
      Photographs
    Columbia county
      Pupils' industrial work
    Cortland county. Collective award, gold medal
      Pupils' written work
    Dutchess county. Collective award, gold medal
      Photographs
    Genesee county
      Photograph
    Herkimer county. Collective award, gold medal
      Pupils' written work
    Lewis county. Collective award, gold medal
      Pupils' written work
    Madison county. Collective award, gold medal
      Photographs
    Monroe county. Collective award, gold medal
      Pupils' written work
    Nassau county. Collective award, gold medal
      Pupils' written work
      Photographs
    Niagara county. Collective award, gold medal
      Pupils' written work
      Photographs
    Oneida county. Collective award, gold medal
      Pupils' written work
    Onondaga county. Collective award, gold medal
      Pupils' written work
      Photographs
    Ontario county. Collective award, gold medal
      Pupils' written work
    Oswego county. Collective award, gold medal
      Pupils' written work
    Rensselaer county. Collective award, gold medal
      Pupils' written work and industrial work
    Schuyler county. Collective award, gold medal
      Pupils' written work
      Photographs
    Ulster county. Collective award, gold medal
      Photographs.
    Washington county. Collective award, gold medal
      Pupils' written work
Rushford, Board of Education, training class. Collective award,
      gold medal
    Students' work
Sag Harbor, Board of Education, public schools
    Seven volumes pupils' written work
St. Patrick's Academy, Catskill
    Two volumes pupils' written work
    Photographs
    Drawings
Salamanca, Board of Education, union school
    Eight volumes pupils' written work
    Photographs
Salamanca, Board of Education, training class. Collective award,
      gold medal
    Students' written work
Sandy Hill, Board of Education, public school
    Photograph
Sandy Hill, Board of Education, training class
    Photograph
Schenectady, Board of Education, public schools. Collective award,
      gold medal
    Eight volumes pupils' written work
    Administrative blanks
    Photographs
South Byron, union school
    Pupils' selected work
    Photograph
Syracuse, Board of Education, public schools. Gold medal
    Pupils' selected work in drawing
    Photographs illustrating physical training course
    Manual training work
Unadilla, Board of Education, training class
    Photographs
Union, Board of Education, training class. Collective award, gold
      medal
    Photographs
Utica, Board of Education, public schools. Collective award, gold
      medal
    Nine volumes pupils' written work
    Manual training and construction work
    Graphic charts
    Photographs
Warrensburg, Board of Education, public schools
    Nine volumes pupils' written work
Waterloo, Board of Education, public schools
    Pupils' selected work
    Catalogues
    Administrative blanks
    Photographs
    Home-made apparatus
Watertown, Board of Education, public schools. Collective award,
      gold medal
    Thirteen volumes pupils' written work
    Drawings
    Annual reports
Watkins, Board of Education, public schools. Collective award,
      gold medal
    Six volumes pupils' written work
    Photographs
    Administrative blanks
Watkins, Board of Education, training class
    Students' written work
Wellsville, Board of Education, public schools. Collective award,
      gold medal
    Seven volumes pupils' written work
White Plains, Board of Education, public schools
    Nine volumes pupils' written work
    Course of study in drawing and manual training
    Drawings, manual training, and Venetian iron work
    Photographs
    Administrative blanks
    Statistics
Whitney Point, Board of Education, training class. Collective
      award, gold medal
    Students' written work
Yonkers, Board of Education, public schools. Gold medal
    Nineteen volumes pupils' written work
    Drawings
    Photographs of buildings
    Photographs illustrating physical training and school plans

The following awards were made in this group to exhibits not a part of
the collective State exhibit:

New York city, Department of Education, collective exhibit. Grand
      prize
    a. School system
    b. Collective exhibit of elementary grades
    c. Collective exhibit of vacation schools and evening schools
    d. Collective exhibit of manual training, drawing, and
       domestic science
    e. Physical training and methods for atypical children
    f. Kindergartens
    g. Free lecture system
    h. Training schools
    i. Exhibit of school buildings
New York city, Department of Education, collective exhibit. Gold
      medal
    Manual training. Drawing. Domestic science
New York city, Department of Education, collective exhibit. Gold
      medal.
    Vacation schools. Evening schools
New York city, Department of Education, collective exhibit. Gold
      medal
    Physical training methods for atypical Children

The following awards were made to collaborators:

Andrew S. Draper, Albany. Grand prize
    Education Department
Charles R. Skinner, Albany. Gold medal
    Department of Public Instruction
DeLancey Al. Ellis, Rochester. Gold medal
    State exhibit
William A. Wadsworth, Geneseo. Gold medal
    Improvement of school grounds
Luther H. Gulick, New York city. Gold medal
    Physical training
Theodore C. Hailes, Albany. Silver medal
    Educational map
John Kennedy, Batavia. Silver medal
    Individual instruction
James P. Haney, New York city. Silver medal
    Manual training
Mrs. Anna L. Jessup, New York city. Silver medal
    Sewing
Mrs. Mary E. Williams, New York city. Silver medal
    Cooking
Evangeline E. Whitney, New York city. Silver medal
    Vacation schools
Matthew J. Elgas, New York city. Silver medal
    Evening schools
C. P. J. Snyder, New York city. Silver medal
    Facade of exhibit

A grand prize was also awarded to the Louisiana Purchase Exposition
Commission of the State of New York for its collective exhibit in this
group, with special mention of the Department of Education,
administrative features; Department of Public Instruction,
administrative features, visual instruction system, and the educational
map.


GROUP TWO

_Secondary Education. Training of Teachers for Same_

Adelphi Academy and College, Brooklyn
    Catalogues
Albany, Board of Education, high school. Gold medal
    Fifteen volumes students' written work
    Photographs illustrating manual training course
    Drawings
Albany, Board of Education, training school
    One volume students' written work
    Photographs
Avon Club, Jamestown High School
    Administrative blanks
    Program of exercises
Batavia, Board of Education, high school. Gold medal
    One volume students' written work
    Photographs
    Drawings
Beck Literary Society, Albany Academy. Bronze medal
    Historical sketch
    Administrative blanks
    Programs
    List of members
Brockport, State Normal School. Collective award, gold medal
    Seventeen volumes students' work
    Photographs
Buffalo, Masten Park High School. Collective award, gold medal
    Administrative blanks
    Two volumes students' written work
    Four volumes student periodical and drawings
Buffalo, State Normal School. Collective award, gold medal
    Two volumes science note books
    Illustrated science work
    Ten volumes publications
    Photographs
Buffalo, Board of Education, Teachers' Training School. Collective
      award, gold medal
    Four volumes students' written work
    Lesson outlines
Canajoharie, Board of Education, high school
    One volume students' written work
Cape Vincent, Board of Education, high school
    Students' selected work
Cattaraugus, Board of Education, high school
    Photographs
    Catalogues
Cohoes, Board of Education, high school
    One volume students' written work and drawings
Cohoes, Board of Education, Teachers' Training School. Collective
      award, gold medal
    Students' written work
Corinth, Board of Education, high school
    Three volumes students' written work
    Photographs
Cortland, Board of Education, high school. Collective award, gold
      medal
    Administrative blanks
    Students' selected work
    Photographs
Cortland, State Normal School. Collective award, gold medal
    Six volumes students' written work
    Photographs
    Administrative blanks
    Catalogues
East Aurora, Board of Education, high school. Collective award,
      gold medal
    Two volumes students' written work
    Photographs
    Catalogues
Education, State Department of. Grand prize
    Charts
    Statistics
    Reports
    Bulletins
    Administrative blanks
Elmira, Board of Education, training school. Collective award,
      gold medal
    Students' written work
    Photographs
Fredonia, State Normal School. Gold medal
    Model of building and floor plans
    One volume lesson outlines
Freeport, Board of Education, high school
    One volume students' written work
Genesee Wesleyan Seminary
    Announcements
    Photographs
Geneseo, State Normal School. Collective award, gold medal
    Eleven volumes students' work
    Photographs
    Illustration of course in drawing
Goshen, Board of Education, high school
    Weather maps
Hazen's School for Girls, Mrs., Pelham Manor
    Science work
Herkimer, Board of Education, high school
    One volume students' written work
Ithaca, Board of Education, high school. Gold medal
    Four volumes students' written work
    Administrative blanks
    One volume catalogues
    Drawings
    Photographs
Jamaica, State Normal School. Collective award, gold medal
    Four volumes lesson outlines and students' written work
    Photographs
Jamestown, Board of Education, high school. Gold medal
    Ten volumes students' written work
    Administrative blanks
    Photographs
    Publications
    Statistics
Jamestown, Board of Education, training school
    Students' written work
Johnstown, Board of Education, high school
    Two volumes students' written work
    Annual report
Kingston, Board of Education, high school
    Two volumes students' written work
    Burnt leather work
    Photographs
Kingston, Board of Education, training school. Collective award,
      gold medal
    Students' written work
Little Falls, Board of Education, high school
    Students' selected work.
Map, educational map of New York State. Gold medal
    (Award to go to Louisiana Purchase Exposition Commission)
Mechanicville, Board of Education, high school
    Students' selected work
Moravia, Board of Education, high school
    Drawings
New Paltz, State Normal School. Gold medal
    Ten volumes students' work in art
    Photographs
    One volume publications
    Rope work
    Doll house
    Administrative blanks
New Rochelle, Board of Education, high school
    Five volumes students' written work
    Photographs
Ogdensburg, Board of Education, high school
    Two volumes students' written work
Olean, Board of Education, high school
    Home-made apparatus
Oneida, Board of Education, high school
    Three volumes students' written work
    Administrative blanks
Oneonta, State Normal School. Collective award, gold medal
    Eight volumes students' written work
    Drawings
    Science note books
    Photographs
Oswego, State Normal School. Collective award, gold medal
    Two volumes students' written work
    Cabinet of manual training work
    Relief maps
    Photographs
Palmyra, Board of Education, high school
    One volume students' work
Phelps, Board of Education, high school
    Students' selected work
Plattsburg, State Normal School. Collective award, gold medal
    Five volumes students' written work
    Photographs
Port Byron, Board of Education, high school
    One volume students' written work
Port Henry, Board of Education, high school
    One volume students' written work
    Photographs
Potsdam, State Normal School. Collective award, gold medal
    Four volumes publications and lesson outlines
    Photographs
Pratt Institute, physical laboratories, Brooklyn
    Home-made apparatus
    Photographs
Rochester, editors of "Clarion," East High School. Bronze medal
    Three volumes students' publication "Clarion"
Sag Harbor, Board of Education, high school
    One volume students' written work
St. Patrick's Academy, Catskill, academic department. Collective
      award, gold medal
    Students' selected work
    Photographs
Salarranca, Board of Education, union school, high school
      department. Collective award, gold medal
    Two volumes students' written work
    Photographs
Schenectady, Board of Education, high school
    Eight volumes students' written work
    Mechanical drawings
    Administrative blanks
    Photographs
Syracuse, Board of Education, High school. Collective award, gold
      medal
    Students' selected drawings
    Floor plans
    Photograph of building
Syracuse, Board of Education, training school. Collective award,
      gold medal
    Students' written work
    Photographs
Tappan Zee High School, Piermont
    Botany note book
Tarrytown, Washington Irving High School
    Home-made apparatus
Utica, Board of Education, high school. Collective award, gold
      medal
    Drawings
    Two volumes students' written work
    Photographs
Utica, Board of Education, training school. Collective award, gold
    medal
    Students' written work
Warrensburg, Board of Education, high school
    Administrative blanks
    Two volumes students' written work
Watertown, Board of Education, high school
    Six volumes students' written work
    Drawings
    Administrative blanks
Watertown, Board of Education, training school. Collective award,
      gold medal
    Students' written work
Watkins, Board of Education, high school
    One volume students' written work
    Photographs
    One volume students' publication
    Administrative blanks
White Plains, Board of Education, high school
    One volume students' written work
    Administrative blanks
    Photographs
Yonkers, Board of Education, high school. Gold medal
    Six volumes students' written work.
    Photographs

The following awards were made in this group to exhibits not a part of
the Collective State Exhibit:

New York city, Department of Education. Grand prize
New York city, Department of Education, Commercial High School.
  Gold medal
New York city, Department of Education, training school. Gold medal
New York city, Department of Education, manual training. Gold medal

The following awards were made to collaborators:
J. Russell Parsons, Jr., Albany. Gold medal
DeLancey M. Ellis, Rochester. Gold medal
Myron T. Scudder, New Paltz. Gold medal
A.T. Marble, New York city. Gold medal
Frank D. Boynton, Ithaca. Gold medal
F.B. Palmer, Fredonia. Gold medal.
James P. Haney, New York city. Silver medal

A grand prize was also awarded to the Louisiana Purchase Exposition
Commission of the State of New York for its collective exhibit in this
group.


GROUP THREE

_Higher Education. Colleges and Universities, Libraries, Museums,
Technical Schools_
Albany. State Normal College. Gold medal
    Statistics
    Publications
Clarkson Memorial School of Technology, Potsdam, N. Y. Bronze medal
    Nine volumes theses
    Three volumes students' written work
    One volume catalogue and addresses
    Photographs
    Mechanical drawings
Colgate University, Hamilton. Silver medal
    Thirty-seven publications
    Map of grounds
    Mechanical drawings
    Statistics
College of Pharmacy, Columbia University, New York city
    Drugs
    Pharmaceutical preparations
    Eight volumes text books
Education, State Department of. (See State Library.) Grand prize
    Reports
    Bulletins
    Administrative blanks
    Statistics
Hobart College, Geneva. Bronze medal
    Map of campus
    Eight volumes publications
    Photographs. Charts
Hobart College. Gold medal
    Astronomical department and discoveries
Manhattan College, department of civil engineering, New York city.
      Silver medal
    Theses
    Mechanical drawing illustrating construction of dams and
      embankments. Also bridge construction
    Annual catalogues
Map, educational map of New York State. Silver medal
    (Award to go to Louisiana Purchase Exposition Commission)
Post Graduate Medical School and Hospital, New York city
    Photographs
    Publications
    Catalogues
Rochester Theological Seminary
    Two volumes catalogues
State Library, Department of Education. Grand prize
    Traveling libraries
    Blanks
    Statistics
Syracuse University, Syracuse. Gold medal
    College of Fine Arts
      Drawings, architectural and free hand
    College of Applied Science
      Metal work
      Wood work
      Model of steam engine
      Home-made laboratory apparatus
University of the State of New York. Grand prize
    Bulletins
    Reports
    Decimal classification
    Traveling library for the blind
    Photographs
    Large pictures
    Statistical charts
    Specimens from Museum Department

The following awards were made in this group to exhibits not a part of
the collective State exhibit:

Columbia University, New York city. Grand prize
    General exhibit
Columbia University, New York city. Gold medal
    Special exhibit of Teachers' College
Columbia University, New York city. Gold medal
    Special exhibit of Department of Botany
Columbia University, New York city. Gold medal
    Special exhibit of Mines and Metallurgy
Columbia University, New York city. Bronze medal
    Special exhibit of Department of Indo-Iranian Languages
Cornell University, Ithaca. Grand prize
    General exhibit
Cornell University, Ithaca. Silver medal
    Special exhibit of water color sketches
Cornell University, Ithaca. Silver medal
    Special exhibit of Sibley College
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy. Grand prize
    General exhibit
Vassar College, Poughkeepsie. Grand prize
    General exhibit
Rev. D. Stuart Dodge, New York city. Gold medal
    Relief map, Protestant College at Beirut, Syria
Pratt Institute, Brooklyn. Gold medal
    Special exhibit of Polytechnic Department
New York University, New York city. Gold medal
Kny-Scheerer Company, New York. city. Gold medal
    Operating tables
    Hospital appliances

The following awards were made to collaborators:

Andrew S. Draper. Gold medal
    Monograph
James Russell Parsons, Jr., Albany. Gold medal
    Monograph
James McKeen Cattell, Columbia University, New York. Gold medal
    Monograph
Edward Delevan Perry, Columbia University, New York. Gold medal
    Monograph
Melvil Dewey, Albany. Gold medal
    State librarian


GROUP FOUR

_Education in Fine Arts_

Clay Working and Ceramics, State School of. Silver medal
    Specimens of pottery and modeling tools
New York School of Applied Design for Women. Gold medal
    Framed designs and prospectus
Syracuse University, College of Fine Arts. Bronze medal
    Architectural and free hand drawing

The following awards were made in this group to exhibits not a part of
the collective State exhibit:

Pratt Institute, Brooklyn, Art Department. Grand prize
Mademoiselle Veltin, New York city. Bronze medal
    School of Fine Arts for Young Ladies


GROUP FIVE


_Education in Agriculture and Forestry_

Education, State Department of, State Museum Division. Grand prize
    Publications
    Statistics
    Charts
    Scientific discoveries

The following awards were made in this group to exhibits not a part of
the collective State exhibit

Cornell University, Ithaca. Gold medal
    Exhibit of root crops
Cornell University, Department of Botany, Ithaca. Gold medal
    Apparatus for photographing
Cornell University, Agricultural Experiment Station, Ithaca. Silver
      medal
    Poultry breeding
Cornell University, Ithaca. Bronze medal
    Insects
New York Agricultural Experiment Station. Gold medal
    Investigations on milk
New York Agricultural Experiment Station. Gold medal
    Curing and paraffining cheese
New York Agricultural Experiment Station. Gold medal
    Commercial feeding stuffs
New York Agricultural Experiment Station. Bronze medal
    Investigations on rusty spot in cheese
New York Agricultural Experiment Station. Bronze medal
    Wax model showing scale
Kny-Scheerer Company, New York city. Gold medal
    Biological preparations
    Biological and anatomical models


GROUP SIX

_Industrial and Trade Schools_

_Business Education. Education of the Indian_

Albany Business College, Albany. Gold medal
    Pen drawings
    Six volumes students' written work
    Photographs
Binghamton School of Business, Binghamton
    Photographs and prospectus
Clara de Hirsch Home for Working Girls, New York
    Photographs
    Industrial work
Education, State Department of
    (See Indian Schools)
Henley Business School, Syracuse
    Photographs
    Administrative blanks
    Students' written work
Indian schools. Silver medal
    [Footnote: Award to go to Education Department, State of New York]
    Collective exhibit, including material from the Allegany,
      Cattaraugus, Tonawanda, Onondaga, Shinnecock and
      Poospatuck Reservations
    Pupils' written work
    Photographs
    Drawings
    Industrial work
Industrial School, Rochester
    Two volumes pupils' written work
    Manual training and industrial work
Manhattan Trade School for Girls, New York city. Silver medal
    Pupils' written work
    Industrial work
    Photographs
    Statistics
New York Trade School, New York. Bronze medal
    Photographs.
    Courses of study

The following awards were made to collaborators:

S.E. Bartow, Albany Business College. Silver medal
    Pen drawings


GROUP SEVEN

_Education for Defectives. The Blind, Deaf and Dumb, Feeble-Minded_

New York Institution for the Improved Instruction of Deaf-Mutes,
New York city.
    Photographs
New York Institution for the Instruction of the Deaf and Dumb,
New York city. Gold medal
    Photographs
    Drawings
    Pupils' written work
    Pyrography
    Publications
    Eighteen volumes of reports
    Text-books
    Administrative blanks
Northern New York Institution for Deaf-Mutes, Malone
    Pupils' selected work in drawing
New York Institution for the Blind, New York city. Bronze medal
    Cord, rattan and raffia work
New York State School for the Blind, Batavia. Silver medal
    Three volumes pupils' work
    Basketry
    Broom making
    Mattress making
    Piano action repairing
    Sewing
    Photographs
    Administrative blanks
State Library, Home Education Division. Silver medal
    Traveling library for the blind
Western New York Institution for Deaf-Mutes, Rochester. Bronze
      medal
    Four volumes pupils' written work
    Five volumes reports and catalogues
    Twenty volumes publications
    Photographs,
    Administrative blanks
    Drawings
    Charts

The following awards were made in this group to exhibits not a part of
the collective State exhibit:

American Association for Instructors of the Blind. Grand prize
    New York State collaborators:
      State School for the Blind, Batavia
      New York School for the Blind, New York city
Association of Medical Officers of Institutions for Idiots and
  Feeble-Minded Persons. Grand prize
    New York State collaborators:
      State Custodial Asylum for Unteachable Idiots, Rome
      State Institution for Feeble-Minded Children, Syracuse
Convention of American Instructors of the Deaf. Grand prize
    New York State collaborator:
      Wright Oral School for the Deaf, New York city
New York city, Department of Education. Gold medal
    For the establishment of a special school for the education
      of atypical children
New York Institution for Feeble-Minded, Syracuse. Gold medal
Wright Oral School for the Deaf, New York city. Bronze medal


GROUP EIGHT

_Summer Schools, Extension Schools, Popular Lectures, Educational
Publications and Appliances_

Adirondack Summer School, Saranac Lake
    Photographs and pamphlets
Chautauqua Institution, Chautauqua, N. Y. Grand prize
    Photographs
    Publications
    Administrative blanks
    Prospectus and syllibi
City History Club of New York. Bronze medal
    Six volumes pupils' written work
    Photographs
    Charts
    Statistics
People's Institute, New York city. Silver medal
    One volume, "Working with the People"
    Prospectus
    Photographs
Teachers' Association, New York State. Gold medal
    Statistical exhibit, 32 graphic charts
Training School for Deaconesses, New York city. Silver medal
    Administrative blanks
    Catalogues
    Photographs
Young Women's Christian Association, New York city. Silver
      medal
    One volume of reports
    Administrative blanks
    Clay modeling
    Pyrography
    Artistic design and art furniture

The following awards were made in this group to exhibits not a part of
the collective State exhibit:

Funk & Wagnalls Company, New York city. Grand prize
Dodd, Mead & Company, New York city. Grand prize
Dr. Nicholas Murray Butler, New York city. Grand prize
American Book Company, school and college text-books. Grand
  prize
Silver, Burdett & Company, New York city. Grand prize
Prang Educational Company, New York city. Grand prize
Charles Beseler Company, New York city, stereopticons and appliances.
      Gold medal
Pitmanic Institute, Phonographic, New York city. Gold medal
C.W. Bardeen, Syracuse. Silver medal
S.S. Packard, New York city. Silver medal

The following awards were made to collaborators:

Henry L. Taylor, professional education in the United States. Gold
  medal

A grand prize Was also awarded to the Louisiana Purchase Exposition
Commission of the State of New York for its collective exhibit in this
group

       *       *       *       *       *

A special Commemorative Diploma was conferred by the Department jury
upon Andrew Sloan Draper, Commissioner of Education of the State of New
York, "in recognition of his distinguished service to Education."

       *       *       *       *       *

RECAPITULATION OF THE AWARDS MADE TO THE STATE OF NEW YORK IN THE
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
Grand Prize Gold Medal
Group I................ 5 Group I................ 63
Group 2................ 3 Group I, collab........  2
Group 3................ 7 Group 2................ 36
Group 4................ I Group 2, collab........  5
Group 5................ I Group 3................ 14
Group 6................ ..Group 4................  I
Group 7................ 3 Group 5................  6
Group 8................ 8 Group 6................  I
Special................ I Group 7................  3
                          Group 8................  4
 [**Total]             29 Special................  4
                                       [**Total] 139
_Silver Medal_                      _Bronze Medal_
Group I................ 2 Group I.............. ..
Group 1, collab........ 8 Group 2................ 2
Group 2................ I Group 3................ 3
Group 3................ 5 Group 4................ 2
Group 4................ I Group 5................ 3
Group 5................ I Group 6................ I
Group 6................ 2 Group 7................ 3
Group 6, collab.......  I Group 8................ I
Group 7................ 2
Group 8................ 5            [**Total]   15

     [**Total]         28
Grand prizes.................  29
Gold medals.................. 139
Silver medals................. 28
Bronze medals................  15
Grand total................   211

[Illustration: PALACE OF EDUCATION FROM FESTIVAL HALL]



CHAPTER X

Fine Arts Exhibit and Schedule of Awards


THE FINE ARTS EXHIBIT

By CHARLES M. KURTZ

Acting Secretary of the Executive Committee on Art

[Illustration]


Up to the time of the organization of the Committee on Art for the State
of New York, appointed by the New York State Louisiana Purchase
Exposition Commission, very little had been accomplished in the
direction of securing a collection of representative works by the
artists of New York for exhibition at the World's Fair at St. Louis.
Professor Ives, Chief of the Department of Art of the Louisiana Purchase
Exposition, and Assistant Chief Kurtz had visited New York at frequent
intervals (the first time in January, 1902), had aroused considerable
interest in the Exposition among the artists, and had secured the
appointment of Advisory Committees of Painters, Sculptors, Architects,
Mural Painters, Miniature Painters, Engravers, Wood Engravers,
Illustrators and Workers in the Applied Arts to look after the
organization of exhibits in their respective fields of expression and
the interests of the Department of Art of the Louisiana Purchase
Exposition in connection therewith.


WAYS AND MEANS

It was impossible, however, for the work to be carried on in an adequate
and worthy manner without State co-operation and assistance, and a
committee of artists, representing the various Advisory Committees,
appeared before the Commission, asked that a committee of artists
representing the State of New York be appointed to co-operate with the
Advisory Committees in the organization of a creditable art exhibit, and
that a suitable sum of money be appropriated from the funds placed at
the disposal of the Commission to defray the cost of organizing the
exhibit, packing, transporting it to and from St. Louis, and insuring it
while in transit; the Exposition authorities having agreed to pay the
cost of unpacking in St. Louis, installation, insurance while in the Art
Palace, and repacking and forwarding at the close of the Exposition.


EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE ON ART

After several meetings at the offices of the Commission in New York city
and a forceful presentation of the condition of affairs (and the urgent
necessity of action by the Commission) by Mr. Watrous, of the Artists'
Committee, the Commission formally resolved to appropriate the sum of
$10,000 for the purpose indicated, and appointed the following
"Executive Committee on Art for the State of New York" to assume general
direction of the work within the limits of the appropriation: Herbert
Adams (sculptor), Grosvenor Atterbury (architect), J. Carroll Beckwith
(painter), Francis C. Jones (painter), Louis Loeb (painter and
illustrator), Will H. Low (painter, illustrator and mural painter) and
Harry W. Watrous (painter). These men variously represented membership
in the National Academy of Design, the Society of American Artists, the
National Sculpture Society, the Society of Mural Painters, the American
Water Color Society, the Society of Illustrators, the New York Etching
Club, the American Fine Art Society, the American Institute of
Architects, the New York Architectural League, the Municipal Art Society
of New York and the Fine Arts Federation of New York. The Committee
formally organized by the election of Harry W. Watrous as Chairman.
Charles M. Kurtz, Assistant Chief of the Department of Art of the
Louisiana Purchase Exposition, was appointed Acting Secretary without
salary.

At a general meeting of the members of all the Advisory Committees in
New York city, called by Chairman Watrous at the National Academy of
Design, for each committee representing a group of the classification a
chairman and a secretary was elected and general plans were formulated
for the carrying on of the work.

Thereafter, frequent meetings were held by the various committees, at
nearly all of which the Chairman of the Executive Committee and the
Acting Secretary were present and participated in the work.


CAREFUL SELECTION OF MATERIAL

The Juries of Selection for the different groups of the classification
of the Department of Art, constituted from the membership of the
Advisory Committees representing various sections of the country, met
and acted during the last two weeks of March, 1904, in the city of New
York, passing upon upwards of 4,000 works submitted for exhibition. Of
this assemblage of works a comparatively small number represented
artists of high reputation, and a small proportion was found to be of
sufficient merit worthily to represent the artists of the State. The
number of exhibits secured thus being very small, and many of the more
prominent artists not having submitted works, the different group juries
held meetings, prepared lists of representative works calculated to
reflect credit upon the State, and specifically invited artists and
owners to lend the same for the Exposition. By this means the larger and
better portion of the exhibit was secured.

The State of New York, the Louisiana Purchase Exposition and the artists
in general in the State of New York are under great obligations to the
members of these juries who so freely, unselfishly and devotedly gave
their valuable time and effort to the organization of the art exhibit
which represented so comprehensively the best achievement of New York
artists.


A REPRESENTATIVE EXHIBIT

Almost every New York painter of individuality and ability--in oil,
water-color and miniature work--was represented adequately and
creditably; the exhibit of sculpture was exceptionally fine; etching and
engraving were exemplified by the ablest exponents of these branches of
art, wood engraving by types of its highest expression; there was an
excellent collection of works from the leading American illustrators,
and noteworthy examples of the applied arts--of artistic handicrafts--by
New York art workers were well in evidence. In architecture, while the
exhibit was creditable, it might have been more comprehensive and
representative; and the same might be said of the exhibit of mural
painting. The latter, however, as readily may be understood, is
extremely difficult of representation at an exposition--most of its
examples having been executed in place, and only cartoons or photographs
of achieved works usually being available for exhibition.


ADVISORY COMMITTEES

The members of the various Advisory Committees in charge of the
organization of the group exhibits were as follows:

For Oil Paintings: Cecilia Beaux, J. Carroll Beckwith, J. G. Brown,
Howard Russell Butler, William M. Chase, William A. Coffin, Frederick
Dielman, R. Swain Gifford, H. Bolton Jones, John La Farge, Alexander T.
Van Laer, Harry W. Watrous.

For Water Colors, Pastels and Lithographs: F.S. Church, Charles C.
Curran, Francis C. Jones, Will H. Low, J.C. Nicoll, Will S. Robinson,
Henry B. Snell.

For Miniature Painting: William J. Baer, Lucia Fairchild Fuller, Laura
C. Hills.

For Sculpture: Daniel C. French, H.A. MacNeil, A. Phimister Proctor,
Augustus Saint Gaudens, J.Q.A. Ward.

For Etchings and Engravings (other than wood engravings): Carlton T.
Chapman, C.F. Mielatz, J.C. Nicoll, Alexander Schilling, James D.
Smillie.

For Wood Engravings: George T. Andrew, Frank French, Henry Wolf.

For Drawings for Illustration: Henry S. Fleming, Charles Dana Gibson,
Arthur I. Keller, Louis Loeb, Howard Pyle.

For Architecture: Grosvenor Atterbury, Arnold W. Brunner, Walter Cook,
H.J. Hardenberg, John Galen Howard, C. Grant La Farge, Charles F. McKim,
Henry Rutgers Marshall, George B. Post.

For Mural Painting: Will H. Low, George W. Maynard, Charles Y. Turner.

For Applied Arts: William Couper, John La Farge, Frederick S. Lamb,
Louis C. Tiffany, Stanford White, Douglas Volk.

Harry W. Watrous, Chairman of Executive Committee, Ex-officio member of
all committees.


_Exhibits of New York Artists Arranged by Groups, Together with the
Number of Works Contributed, and Award, if Any, Received by Each_


GROUP NINE

_Paintings and Drawings_

_Oil Paintings_

Alexander, John W., 8. Gold medal
Anderson, Karl J., 1
Barse, George R., 1
Baylos, Zellna, 1
Beal, Gifford, 2. Bronze medal
Beaux, Cecilia, 3. Gold medal
Beckwith, Carroll, 3. Silver medal
Bell, Edward A., 1. Silver medal
Birney, W. V., 2. Bronze medal
Blakelock, R. A., 1
Blenner, Carle J., 2. Bronze medal
Blum, Robert F. (deceased), 1
Bogert, George H., 2. Silver medal
Borglum, Gutzon, 1
Brigham, W. Cole, 1
Bristol, J. B., 1
Brown, Ethelbert, 1
Brown, J. Francis, 1
Brown, J. G., 5
Brown, Matilda, 1
Bruce, Patrick Henry, 1
Brush, George de Forest. 1. Gold medal
Burroughs, Bryson, 2. Bronze medal
Butler, Howard Russell, 2. Bronze medal
Carlsen, Emil, 4. Gold medal
Carr, Lyell, 2. Bronze medal
Chapman, Carlton T., 2
Chase, William M., 7
Child, Edward B., 2
Church, Frederick S., 3. Silver medal
Clark, Walter, 2. Silver medal
Coffin, William A., 2. Silver medal
Collins, Alfred Q. (deceased), 2
Coman, Charlotte B., 2
Cooper, Colin C., 5
Cooper, Emma Lampert, 1. Bronze medal
Cotton, Mrs. Leslie, 1
Couse, E. Irving, 3. Bronze medal
Cox, Kenyon, 1. Gold medal
Cox, Louise, 1. Silver medal
Crane, Bruce, 6. Gold medal
Crane, Frederick, 2. Bronze medal
Curran, Charles C., 4. Silver medal
Curtis, Constance, 1
Curtis, Elizabeth, 1
Daingerfield, Elliott, 1
De Forest, Lockwood, 1
De Haven, Frank, 1. Silver medal
Denman, Herbert (deceased), 1
Dewey, Charles Melville, 2. Silver medal
Dodge, W. de Leftwich, 2
Dougherty, Paul, 1
Drake, W. H., 1
Dufner, Edward, 3. Silver medal
Du Mond, Frank V., 6. Silver medal
Dustin, Silas S., 1
Eaton, Charles Warren, 4. Silver medal
Emmett, Ellen, 2. Silver medal
Emmett, Lydia Field, 1. Silver medal
Ericson, David, 1. Silver medal
Field, Edward Loyal, 1
Flagg, Montague, 1. Silver medal
Florian, Walter, 3. Silver medal
Foote, Will Howe, 1. Bronze medal
Foster, Ben, 3. Silver medal
Fournier, Alexis J., 3
Fowler, Frank, 3
Fromkes, Maurice, 1
Gauley, Robert D., 3. Bronze medal
Gay, Edward, 2. Bronze medal
Gifford, R. Swain, 3
Glackens, W. J., 1. Silver medal
Green, Frank Russell, 2. Bronze medal
Groll, Albert L., 2. Silver medal
Guy, Seymour J., 4. Gold medal
Harrison, Birge, 5. Silver medal
Hart, Letitia B., 1
Hart, Mary T., 1
Hassam, Childe, 6. Gold medal
Havens, Belle, 1
Hawthorne, C. W., 1
Henri, Robert. 2. Silver medal
Henry, Edward L., 3. Bronze medal
Herzog, Louis, 2. Bronze medal
Hitchcock, Lucius W., 1. Bronze medal
Hoeber, Arthur, 1
Homer, Winslow, 2. Gold medal
Howe, W. H., 3
Humphreys, Albert, 1
Huntington, Daniel, 1
Hyde, William H., 1
Inness, George, Jr., 2
Isham, Samuel, 3. Silver medal
Johnson, Eastman, 2. Gold medal
Jones, Francis C., 2. Silver medal
Jones, H. Bolton, 3. Gold medal
Jongers, Alphonse, 2. Silver medal
Kaufman, John F., 1
Kendall, Margaret, 1. Bronze medal
Kendall, W. Sergeant, 5. Gold medal
Ketcham, Susan N., 1
Kline, William F., 2. Bronze medal
Kost, Frederick W., 2. Silver medal
Lang, Charles M., 1
Lathrop, W. L., 1. Bronze medal
Lawson, Ernest, 2. Silver medal
Lee, Henry C., 1
Lee, Homer, 1
Leigh, W. R., 1
Lie, Jonas, 3. Silver medal
Linson, Corwin K., 2
Lippincott, W. H., 2. Bronze medal
Lockman, De Witt M., 1
Loeb, Louis, 2. Silver medal
Low, Will H., 5
Lucas, Alfred P., 1
Lyman, Joseph, 1. Bronze medal
McChasney, Clara T., 1. Bronze medal
McCord, George H., 1. Bronze medal
McIlhenny, C. M. (deceased), 2
McLane, M. Jean, 2. Bronze medal
Marchand, J. N., 1
Marsh, Frederick Dana, 1. Bronze medal
Maynard, George W., 2
Metcalf, Willard L., 3. Silver medal
Miller, Charles H., 1
Millet, F. D., 1
Minor, Robert C. (deceased), 2
Mora, F. Luis, 1. Bronze medal
Moran, Thomas, 2
Moschowitz, Paul, 2. Silver medal
Mosler, Gustave H., 1. Bronze medal
Mosler, Henry, 1
Murphy, J. Francis, 2. Silver medal
Myers, Jerome, 2. Bronze medal
Mygatt, R. K., 1. Silver medal
Needham, C. Austin, 3. Bronze medal
Newell, G. Glenn, 1
Nicoll, J. C., 3
Norton, W. E., 1
Ochtman, Leonard, 5. Gold medal
Palmer, Walter L., 2. Silver medal
Parton, Arthur, 2. Bronze medal
Perrine, Van Deering, 3
Poore, Henry R., 3. Silver medal
Porter, Benjamin C., 3. Silver medal
Post, W. Merritt, 2
Potthast, Edward H., 3. Silver medal
Prellwitz, Henry, 1. Silver medal
Questgaard, W., 1
Raught, J. W., 2
Rehn, F. K. M. 3. Silver medal
Reid, Robert, 3. Silver medal
Remington, Frederic, 1
Rice, W. M. J., 1
Robinson, Theodore (deceased), 4
Robinson, Will S., 2
Rook, Edward F., 5. Silver medal
Rouland, Orlando, 1
Sartain, William, 1
Saxton, John Gordon, 1. Bronze medal
Schreyvogel, Charles, 1. Bronze medal
Schroeter, Alexander, 1
Schwill, William V., 3. Bronze medal
Sears, Taber, 1. Bronze medal
Sewell, Amanda B., 3. Bronze medal
Sewell, Robert V. V., 1. Silver medal
Sheppard, Warren, 1
Sherwood, M. C., 1
Shirlaw, Walter, 1. Silver medal
Shurtleff, R. M., 1. Bronze medal
Sieber, E. G., 1
Simmons, Edward E., 1
Smillie, George H., 1. Bronze medal
Smith, De Cost, 1
Smith, W. Granville, 1
Snell, Henry B., 3. Silver medal
Steichen, Eduard, 2
Stokes, Frank W., 1
Talcott, Allen B., 4. Silver medal
Thorne, William, 3
Todd, Henry S., 1. Bronze medal
Tryon, D. W., 4. Gold medal
Turcas, Jules, 1. Bronze medal
Twachtman, J. H. (deceased), 3
Van Boskerck, R. W., 3. Silver medal
Van der Veer, Mary, 1. Bronze medal
Van Laer, Alexander T., 3
Volk, Douglas, 3. Silver medal
Vonnoh, Robert W., 5
Voorhees, Clark G., 1. Bronze medal
Walcott, H.M., 2. Silver medal
Walker, Horatio, 4. Gold medal
Walker, Henry Oliver, 2. Silver medal
Watrous, Harry W., 2
Weber, F.W., 1
Weir, J. Alden, 2. Gold medal
Whittemore, W.J., 1
Whittredge, Worthington, 3. Silver medal
Weigand, Gustav, 1. Bronze medal
Wiggins, Carleton, 4
Wiles, Irving R., 5. Gold medal
Wiley, Frederick J., 5. Bronze medal
Woolf, S.J., 1
Wores, Theodore, 1
Wyant, A.H. (deceased), 3
Yates, Cullen, 1. Bronze medal
Total--Artists, 207; works, 423

_Water Colors and Pastels_

Annan, Alice H., 1
Barse, George R., 1
Beckwith, Carroll, 2. See "Oil Paintings"
Bicknell, E.M., 1
Birney, W.V., 1. See "Oil Paintings"
Blum, Robert F. (deceased), 2
Bridges, Fidelia, 1
Bristol, J.B., 1
Brown, J.G., 1
Budworth, W.S., 3
Butler, Howard Russell, 2. See "Oil Paintings"
Chapman, Carlton T., 1
Chase, William M., 1
Clements, George H., 1
Clinedinst, B.W., 2
Colby, Josephine W., 1
Colman, Samuel, 1
Coman, Charlotte B., 1
Cooper, Colin C., 1
Cooper, Emma Lampert, 4. See "Oil Paintings"
Crowninshield, Frederic, 1
Curran, Charles C., 1. See "Oil Paintings"
Curtis, Constance, 1
Daingerfield, Elliott, 2
De Luce, Percival, 1
Dewey, Charles Melville, 2. See "Oil Paintings"
Dewing, Thomas W., 8. Gold medal
Dielman, Frederick, 2
Drake, Will H., 1
Eaton, Charles Warren, 3. See "Oil Paintings"
Edwards, George Wharton, 2
Fenn, Harry, 1
Foss, H. Campbell, 2
Foster, Ben, 1. See "Oil Paintings"
Fry, G. T., 2
Gifford, R. Swain, 1
Gilbert, C. Allen, 3
Green, Frank Russell, 1. See "Oil Paintings"
Greene, F. Stewart, 1
Guerin, Jules, 2. Silver medal
Hardenbergh, Elizabeth R., 1
Hassam, Childe, 3. See "Oil Paintings"
Homer, Winslow, 1. See "Oil Paintings"
Hore, Ethel, 1
Isham, Samuel, 1. See "Oil Paintings"
Jones, H. Bolton, 1. See "Oil Paintings"
Keith, Dora Wheeler, 1
Keller, Arthur L., 3. Silver medal
Kinsella, James, 3
La Farge, John, 3. See "Commemorative Award"
Liebscher, Gustav, 1
Linson, Corwin K., 3
Lippincott, W. H., 1. See "Oil Paintings"
McCord, George H., 3. See "Oil Paintings"
McIlhenny, C. M. (deceased), 1
McLane, M. Jean, 2. See "Oil Paintings"
McChesney, Clara T., 1. See "Oil Paintings"
Mora, F. Luis, 1. See "Oil Paintings"
Moran, Percy, 2
Newell, G. Glenn, 2
Nicholls, Rhoda H., 2. Bronze medal
Nicoll, J. C., 2
O'Leary, Angela, 1
Ochtman, Leonard, 1. See "Oil Paintings"
Of, George F., Jr., 1
Palmer, Walter L., 4. See "Oil Paintings"
Platt, Alethea H., 2
Post, W. M., 1
Potthast, Edward H., 1. See "Oil Paintings"
Proctor, A. Phimister, 1. Bronze medal
Redmond, Frieda W., 1
Redmond, John J., 2
Rehn, F. K. M., 1. See "Oil Paintings"
Ritschel, William, 2
Robinson, Will S., 1. Bronze medal
Rockwood, Catherine C., 2
Rook, Edward F., 1
Rosenmeyer, B. J., 2
Sanders, Bertha D., 2
Schilling, Alexander, 2. Silver medal
Schneider, W. G., 1
Scott, Emily M., 2
Sherwood, Rosina E., 5. Silver medal
Shirlaw, Walter, 5. See "Oil Paintings"
Shurtleff, R. M., 2. See "Oil Paintings"
Smillie, George H., 1. See "Oil Paintings"
Smith, F. Hopkinson, 3
Smith, W. Granville, 1
Snell, Florence F., 1
Snell, Henry B., 4. See "Oil Paintings"
Soper, James H. Gardner, 1. Bronze medal
Spafard, Myra B., 1
Stowell, M. Louise, 1
Tryon, D. W., 15. See "Oil Paintings"
Twachtman, J. H. (deceased), 3
Van Laer, Alexander T., 1
Walker, Horatio, 3. See "Oil Paintings"
Weir, J. Alden, 3. See "Oil Paintings"
Weldon, C. D., 2
Whittemore, W. J., 2
Yates, Cullen, 2. See "Oil Paintings"
Zogbaum, Rufus F., 1
Total--Artists, 102; works, 194

_Miniatures_

Baer, W. J., 3
Baxter, Martha W., 2
Bayliss, Lillian, 1
Beckington, Alice, 4. Bronze medal
De Haas, Alice P. T., 1
Dix, Eulabee, 1
Emmett, Lydia Field, 1. See "Oil Paintings"
Holley, Caroline E., 3
Howard, Clara, 1
Kendall, Margaret, 3. See "Oil Paintings"
King, Paul, 1
Nicholls, Rhoda H., 3. See "Water Colors"
Searle, Alice A., 1
Shuttleworth, Claire, 1
Siboni, Emma B., 5
Strean, Maria J., 2
Thayer, Theodora W., 3
Turner, Helen M., 3
Underwood, Edith B., 1
Volk, Ellen S., 1
Weidner, Carl, 3
West, Anne Shaw, 1
Wing, Alice B., 1. Bronze medal
Worrall, R., 2
Total--Artists, 24; works, 48

_Mural Paintings and Designs_

Armstrong, Helen M.,
Blashfield, Edwin H., 14. Gold medal
Breck, George W., 2. Silver medal
Burgess, Ida J., 1
Burroughs, Bryson, 3. See "Oil Paintings"
Cowles, Maud Alice, 1
Cox, Kenyon, 2. See "Oil Paintings"
Crawford, Earl S., 1
Curtis, Constance, 1
Dielman, Frederick. 6
Deming, Edward W., 3. Bronze medal
Dodge, W. de Leftwich, 3
Kaufman, J. F., 1
Kline, William F., 1. See "Oil Paintings"
Lamb, Ella Condie, 1
Lauber, Joseph, 5
Lichtenauer, J. M., Jr., 2
Low, Will H., 6
Marsh, Frederic Dana, 4. See "Oil Paintings"
McLane, M. Jean, 1. See "Oil Paintings"
Mora, F. Luis, 1. See "Oil Paintings"
O'Brien, Madeleine, 1
Sears, Taber, 2
Sewell, Robert V. V., 2. See "Oil Paintings"
Shean, Charles M., 1. Bronze medal
Shirlaw, Walter, 3. See "Oil Paintings"
Turner, C. Y., 5. Silver medal
Vaillant, Louis D., 2
Walker, Henry Oliver, 10. See "Oil Paintings"
Wenzell, A. B., 2. Silver medal
Total--Artists, 30; works, 92

_Drawings for Illustrations_

Chapman, Carlton T., 1
Child, Edward B., 3
Clay, John Cecil, 3
Cowles, Genevieve, 1
Cowles, Maud A., 1. Bronze medal
Du Mond, Frank V., 5. See "Oil Paintings"
Edwards, George Wharton, 3
Fogarty, Thomas, 5
Gibson, Charles Dana, 3. Silver medal
Gillam, Victor, 3
Glackens, W. J., 8. Bronze medal
Hambidge, Jay, 1
Hinton, Charles L., 6
Hitchcock, Lucius W., 4. Silver medal
Hutt, Henry, 1
Keller, Arthur I., 6. Gold medal
Lawrence, William H., 1
Leigh, William H., 2
Leyendecker, F. X., 5
Linson, Corwin K., 2
Loeb, Louis, 5. Silver medal
Orson, Lowell, 6
McCarter, Henry, 3. Silver medal
McLane, M. Jean, 2. See "Oil Paintings"
Mora, F. Luis, 1. See "Oil Paintings"
Parrish, Maxfield, 2
Penfold, Edward, 5
Reuterdahl, H., 5
Rhead, Louis J., 3
Rosenmeyer, B. J., 1
Sherwood, Rosina E., 4
Shinn, Florence S., 2
Smith, W. Granville, 1
Steele, Frederic Door, 5. Bronze medal
Sterner, Albert, 2
Stevens, W. D., 3
Taylor, C. Jay, 3
Van der Veer, Mary, 1. See "Oil Paintings"
Walcott, H. M., 1. See "Oil Paintings"
Wenzell, A. B., 4. See "Mural Paintings and Designs"
White, C. H., 1
Winslow, Eleanor C., 1
Zogbaum, R. F., 2
Total--Artists, 43; works, 127

The following commemorative award was also conferred in this group:

La Farge, John, commemorating distinguished service in art. Medal of
  honor


GROUP TEN

_Engravings and Lithographs_

_Etchings and Engravings_

(Other than Wood Engravings)

Bacher, Otto H., 4. Silver medal
Beckwith, Carroll, 1
Bellows, A. F., 4
Bloodgood, R. F., 2
Blum, Robert F. (deceased), 3
Chapman, Carlton T., 8
Dielman, Frederick, 2
Farrar, Henry (deceased), 1
Guy, Seymour J., 1
Hale, Walter, 6
Hambidge, Jay, 1
Hovenden, Thomas (deceased), 2
Jones, H. Bolton, 1
King, James S., 1
Lathrop, W. L., 4
Laube, Joseph, 7
Lewis, Arthur Allen, 3. Bronze medal
Lippincott, W. H., 3
Loewenburg, N., 2
Mielatz, Charles F. W., 21
Moran, Mary Nimmo (deceased), 7
Nicoll, J. C., 9
Osgood, Harry H., 7
Reich, Jacques, 2
Robbins, Horace W. (deceased), 1
Roth, Ernest D., 4
Sandreczki, Otto W., 1
Schilling, Alexander, 10
Schneider, Otto J., 5
Scholl, E., 2
Senseney, George, 1
Shelton, W. H., 1
Smillie, James D., 12
Sterne, Maurice J., 13. Bronze medal
Trowbridge, Vaughan, 7
Vondrous, John C., 6
White, Charles H., 3. Bronze medal
Weir, J. Alden, 21. Silver medal
Wood, Thomas W. (deceased), 1
Yale, Leroy M., 7
Yewell, George H., 3
Total--Artists, 41; works, 200


_Wood Engravings_

Bernstrom, Victor, 2. Silver medal
Chadwick, C. W., 4. Bronze medal
Cole, Timothy, 10. Grand prize
Evans, John W., 5
French, Frank, 1. Gold medal
Heineman, E., 2
Klotz, H., 1. Bronze medal
Kruell, Gustav, 8. Gold medal
Merrill, Hiram C., 5. Bronze medal
Northcote, Stafford M., 1. Bronze medal
Watt, William G., 1
Wolf, Henry, 29. See "Commemorative Award"
Total--Artists, 12; works, 69

The following commemorative award was also conferred in this group:

Wolf, Henry, commemorating distinguished service in art. Medal of honor


GROUP ELEVEN

_Sculpture_

Adams, Herbert, 5. Gold medal
Alfano, Vincenzo, 2
Bissell, George E., 1. Silver medal
Bitter, Karl T. F., 4. Gold medal
Borglum, Gutzon, 8. Gold medal
Borglum, Solon, 9. Gold medal
Boyle, John J., 5. Silver medal
Brenner, Victor David, 28. Silver medal
Bush-Brown, H. K., 7
Carpenter, Margaret S.; 1. Bronze medal
Eberle, Mrs. A. V., 1. Bronze medal
Flanaghan, John, 4. Silver medal
French, Daniel Chester, 4
Glenny, Alice R., 1
Goodwin, Mrs. Frederick, 1
Harvey, Eli, 9. Bronze medal
Heber, C. A., 1. Bronze medal
Hyatt, Mrs. A. V., 2. Bronze medal
Jaegers, Albert, 1. Bronze medal
Konti, Isidore, 2. Gold medal
Linder, Henry, 1. Bronze medal
Longman, Evelyn B., 4. Silver medal
Lopez, Charles A., 6. Gold medal
Lukeman, Augustus, 1. Bronze medal
MacNeil, Hermon A., 3
Mears, Helen F., 1. Silver medal
Miranda, Fernando, 1
Niehaus, Charles H., 8. Gold medal
Piccirilli, Attilio, 4. Silver medal
Piccirilli, Furio, 1. Silver medal
Proctor, A. Phimister, 4. Gold medal
Rhind, J. Massey, 1. Bronze medal
Roth, Frederick G. R., 7. Silver medal
Saint Gaudens, Augustus, 1. See "Commemorative Award"
Salvatore, Victor, 1. Bronze medal
Schwarzott, Maximilian, 1. Bronze medal
Scudder, Janet, 1. Bronze medal
Stillman, Effie, 3. Bronze medal
Tonetti, F. M. L., 3. Bronze medal
Triebel, C. E., 1
Usher, Leila, 1
Vonnoh, Bessie Potter, 10. Gold medal
Ward, Elsie, 1. Bronze medal
Ward, John Quincy Adams, 1. See "Commemorative Award"
Warner, Olin L. (deceased), 2
Weinert, Albert, 1
Weinmann, Adolf A., 5. Silver medal
Yandell, Enid, 1. Bronze medal
Zolnay, George Julian, 2
Total--Artists, 49; works, 173

The following commemorative awards were also conferred in this group:
Augustus Saint Gaudens, commemorating distinguished service in
  art. Medal of honor
John Ouincy Adams Ward, commemorating distinguished service
  in art. Medal of honor


GROUP TWELVE

_Architecture_

Atterbury, Grosvenor, 3. Silver medal
Babb, Cook & Willard, 2
Boring & Tilton, 6. Silver medal
Brunner, Arnold W., 4. Gold medal
Carrere, Brunner & Burnham, 6
Carrere & Hastings, 7. Gold medal
Coulter, W. L., 2
Flagg, Ernest, 14
Friedlander, J. H., 3
Gilbert, Cass, 3. Gold medal
Green & Wicks, 1
Hardenbergh, H. J., 1
Heins & La Farge, 4. Silver medal
Langton, D. W., 1
Lord & Hewlett, 4
Total--Architects, 15; works, 61

The following commemorative award was also conferred:

John M. Carrere. Gold medal


GROUP FOURTEEN

_Original Objects of Art Workmanship_

_Applied Arts_

Adams, Ralph R., 2
Archer, Annie M., 1
Bell, Peter, 1
Binns, Charles F., 5. Silver medal
Burdick, Bessie, 2
Crosbee, Mrs. W. G., 2
Farnham, Paulding, 15. Gold medal
Foote, Florence, 4. Bronze medal
Fry, Marshall, 7
Hicks, Amy M., 2
Hoagland, Jane, 3
Lamb, Frederick S., 1
Lawrence, F. Walter, 27
Leonard, Anna B., 7. Silver medal
MacNeil, Mrs. Carol B., 5. Bronze medal
Perkins, Mrs. Annie F., 2
Perkins, Lucy F.4. Bronze medal
Pond, T. H., 1
Randolph, Isabella, 2
Robineau, Mrs. A. A., 7
Sanders, Bertha D., 1
Solon, L. M., 1
Tiffany, Louis C. (designer), 79. Silver medal
Volk, Mrs. Douglas, 2. Silver medal
Volk, Wendell D., 1
Volkmar, Charles, 9. Bronze medal
Von Rydingsvaard, Karl, 1
Wolrath, Frederic E., 2. Bronze medal
Yandell, Charles R., 9
  Total--Artists, 29; works, 205

The following special commemorative awards were also conferred in the
Department of Art:

Harry W. Watrous, for valuable assistance in the formation of the
  exhibit of the United States section. Gold medal

Charles M. Kurtz, for service in connection with the Department of Art,
  direction of installation, etc. Gold medal

George Julian Zolnay, for service in connection with the Department of
  Art, direction of installation, etc. Gold medal


RECAPITULATION

_Showing the Relative Importance of the Participation of the State of
New York in the United States Section of the Department of Art of the
Louisiana Purchase Exposition, St. Louis, 1904_


New York's Participation compared with that of the entire United States
including New York.

-----|-------|-------|-------|--------|-------|-------|------|------|------|------
     |       |       |       | Draw-  | Etch- |       |      |      |      |
     | Water |       |       | ings   | ings  |       |      |      |      |
Oil  | Color |       | Mural |  for   | and   | Wood  |      | Archi| Ap-  |
Paint|  and  | Minia-| Paint | Illus- | Engrav| Engrav| Sculp| -tec-| plied|
-ing | Pastel| tures | -ings | tration| -ings | -ings | -ture| ture | Arts |Totals
-----|-------|-------|-------|--------|-------|-------|------|------|------|------
[*]Total number of artists represented in the United States Section.
 472 |  185  |   52  |   41  |    54  |   59  |   14  |   92 |   74 |  200 | 1,243
-----|-------|-------|-------|--------|-------|-------|------|------|------|------
[*]N. Y. artists represented
 207 |  102  |   24  |   30  |    43  |   41  |   12  |   49 |   15 |   29 |   552
-----|-------|-------|-------|--------|-------|-------|------|------|------|------
Total number of works in the United States Section
 904 |  314  |   90  |  114  |   178  |  269  |   82  |  354 |  290 |  946 | 3,541
-----|-------|-------|-------|--------|-------|-------|------|------|------|------
Works by New York artists
 413 |  194  |   48  |   92  |   127  |  200  |   69  |  173 |   61 |  205 | 1,592
-----|-------|-------|-------|--------|-------|-------|------|------|------|------

[Footnote *: Where an artist has exhibited in more than one class, his
name has been counted more than once.]



 1=Oil Painting
 2=Water Color and Pastel
 3=Miniatures
 4=Mural Paintings
 5=Drawings for Illustration
 6=Etchings and engravings
 7=Wood Engravings
 8=Sculpture
 9=Architecture
10=Applied Arts

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
New York's Participation
compared with that of
the entire United States
including New York         1   2   3   4     5   6   7   8     9   10   Totals
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[1]SALES EFFECTED
For all United States
artists...............    87  34                26  10  14        375     546
For New York artists..    54  22                20  10  13         10     129
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
AWARDS                  |-----------------|-----------|
Comm.    { To all U.S.
Gold     {   artists             1                 1     2      -    -      4
Medals   { To New York
of Honor {   artists             1                 1     2      -    -      4
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
         { To all U.S.
Grand    {   artists             1                 1     1      -    3      6
Prizes   { To New York
         {   artists
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
         { To all U.S.
Gold     {   artists            36                 4     12     7    8     67
Medals   { To New York
         {   artists            19                 3      9     4    1     36
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
         { To all U.S.
Silver   {   artists            99                12     19    11   15    156
Medals   { To New York
         {   artists            58                 7     10     3    4     82
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
         { To all U.S.
Bronze   {   artists           103                17     29     4   22    175
Medals   { To New York
         {   artists            52                10     16     -    5     83
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
TOTALS
To all United States
  artists                      240                35     63    22   48    408
To New York artists            130                21     37     7   10    205
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Special  {Total to
Comm.    { U.S.      7                                                    415
Gold     { To New
Medals   { Yorkers   3                                                    208
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Footnote 1: In the report of the Superintendent of the Bureau of Sales,
the Paintings sold approximated in value $70,000; the Engravings, $900;
the Sculpture, $2,000, and the works of Applied Art, $7,500.

Out of the 904 oil paintings, 241 were owned by private parties (many
being portraits) and were not for sale. Of the 662 works for sale, the
87 sold constituted nearly 13% of the whole number. The oil paintings
contributed by New York artists which were not for sale numbered 138,
leaving 281 for sale. The 54 works sold constituted approximately 20% of
the New York pictures offered for sale.

Of the 314 water colors, 73 were not for sale. There were 241 for sale.
The 34 works sold were approximately 13% of the entire number offered.
Of the 194 water colors by New York artists, 46 were not for sale. Of
the 148 works for sale, the 22 sold is nearly 15% of the number of works
offered by New York artists in this medium.]


THE INTERNATIONAL JURY

The International Jury in the Department of Art was composed of the
following members

_United States_.--Thomas Allen, E. A. Batchelder, S. S. Beman, Hugh
H. Breckenridge, Richard E. Brooks, Carlton T. Chapman (New York),
William M. Chase (New York), Ralph Clarkson, Walter Cook (New York),
Conlin Campbell Cooper (New York), Charles Percy Davis, Frank Miles Day,
Lockwood de Forest (New York), Frederick Dielman (New York), Frank
Duveneck, Daniel Chester French (New York), Mrs. Eugene Field, R. Swain
Gifford (New York), Charles Grafly, Will H. Low (New York), Hermon A.
MacNeil (New York), Elizabeth St. John Mathews, J. L. Mauran, C. F. W.
Mielatz (New York), James Craig Nicoll (New York), Joseph Pennell, Mary
Solari, Theodore C. Steele, Alice Barber Stevens, Edmund C. Tarbell, S.
Seymour Thomas, Alexander T. Van Laer (New York), Bessie Potter Vonnoh
(New York), Robert W. Vonnoh (New York), C. Howard Walker, H. Langford
Warren, Rose Weld, Frederic Allen Whiting, Carleton Wiggins (New York),
Henry Wolf (New York), Edmund H. Wuerpel

_Argentia_.--Eduardo Schiaffino, George Julian Zolnay (New York)

_Austria_.--Dr. Paul Cohn, Adolph Kraus, Gustav Niederlein,
Nicolaus Staits, William J. King

_Belgium_.--Guillaume de Groot, Ernest Verlant

_Brazil_.---J. Americo dos Santos

_Bulgaria_.--Charles M. Kurtz (New York)

_Canada_.--Paul Harney

_Cuba_.--Gonzalo de Quesada

_Germany_.--William J. Baer (New York), Erich Hoesel, Richard
Müller, Hans von Petersen, Max Schlichting, Fr. von Thiersch

_Holland_.--William H. Howe (New York), Willy Martens, John C.
Schüller, Herbert Vos

_Hungary_.--Bertelon Karlovsky, George Julian Zolnay (New York)

_Italy_.--Professor Pepoti Cantalamessa, Il Marchese Majnoni
d'Itagnano, Ugo Ojetti

_Japan_.--Tooru Iwamura, Heromich Shugio

_Mexico_.--Isidoro Aldasoro

_Portugal_.--Marcel Horteloup

_Russia_.--William H. Fox, J. M. Godberg, Emil Vautier

_Sweden_.--Anshelm Schultzberg, Dr. Eugene Wagner

From the above jurors the juries for the several groups of the
classification were made up--each group jury being international in
character.


LOAN COLLECTION OF PAINTINGS

A prominent feature of the United States section of the Department of
Art was a loan collection composed of especially noteworthy paintings
from some of the most noted private collections of the United States.
This collection was organized by Mr. Will H. Low, of New York. It
contained 122 paintings representing many schools and periods. Of these
works forty-three were lent by New York owners, as follows:

_George J. Gould_.--Domenico Ghirlandajo, Rembrandt van Ryn ("The
Standard Bearer"), Frans Hals, Aert van der Neer, Gerard Don, Jean Marc
Nattier, Sir Joshua Reynolds ("The Duchess of Marlborough"), Thomas
Gainsborough; John Constable, J. M. W. Turner, Eugene Fromentin,
Constant Troyon, Theodore Rosseau ("The Charcoal Burners' Hut" and "Le
Cure, Evening"), J.B.C. Corot ("Le Dance des Amours"), N.V. Diaz,
Mariano Fortuny and J.L. Gerome

_Helen Miller Gould_.--Jean Francois Millet ("Washerwomen"), J. L.
E. Meissonier ("The Smoker"), Rosa Bonheur, Alfred Stevens and Ludwig
Knaus ("The Children's Party")

_Estate of Jay Gould_.--J.B.C. Corot ("Antique Dance") and Emile
van Marcke

_Duraud-Ruel_.--Alexandre Gabriel Decamps, Eugene Delacroix,
Gustave Courbet, Eugene Fromentin, Francois Bonvin (two examples),
J.B.C. Corot, and Jules Dupre

_Charles Fairchild_.--William Morris Hunt and Elihu Vedder

_Lockwood de Forest_.--Frederick E. Church

_National Academy of Design_.--Octave Tassaert and R. Caton
Woodville

_Cottier & Co_.--Sir John Everett Millais

_Charles M. Kurtz_.--Anton Mauve ("Sheep on the Dunes")

_Julia Wilder Kurtz_.--Thomas Couture



CHAPTER XI

Agriculture and Live Stock Exhibit and Schedule of Awards


AGRICULTURE AND LIVE STOCK EXHIBIT

By J. H. DURKEE

Superintendent

[Illustration]



The New York State Commission, in July, 1903, appointed J. H. Durkee, of
Sandy Hill, N. Y., superintendent of agriculture, live stock and dairy
products, with John McCann, of Elmira, Howard Moon, of Cobleskill,
Theodore Horton, of Elmira, and W. A. Smith as assistants in the
department of agriculture, W. W. Smallwood, of Warsaw, and W. A.
McCoduck, of Sandy Hill, having direct supervision of live stock and
dairy products respectively. George A. Smith, of Geneva, was
superintendent for collecting dairy products. These gentlemen did the
work assigned them faithfully and well, which is fully attested by the
number of grand prizes and medals won in these departments.


SCOPE OF EXHIBIT

New York State has no distinctive agricultural product as has many of
the other, especially some of the western, States but grows nearly
everything in larger or smaller quantities that is grown in the north
temperate zone.

In collecting and installing this exhibit, the aim was to gather these
varied products and arrange them so as to show the real grain or
vegetable to the best advantage rather than to show a fancifully
arranged display of such products as would be of little or no value to
those interested in practical agriculture. With this end in view, each
section of the State was drawn upon for the best samples of the staple
crops of that section. These samples were carefully inspected by
competent judges, and only those of real merit were placed in the
collection for exhibit. So thoroughly was this work of selection done
that a large proportion of the samples received an award.


LABELING EACH SPECIMEN

That the exhibit might be of the greatest value to those most interested
in agricultural pursuits, on each sample was placed a card giving the
name and variety of the sample, also the name and post office address of
the grower. Every day men could be seen with pencil and paper in hand
taking names and addresses for future correspondence.


CONTINUOUS DISPLAY OF VEGETABLES

New York was one of the few States that had its exhibit complete at the
opening of the Exposition, and was the only State that made a large and
continuous display of fresh vegetables. Its display was greatly admired
and favorably commented upon by the press, as well as by individuals.
From the opening of the Exposition until the crop of 1904 was ready, the
tables of the New York exhibit were kept filled with the standard
vegetables of 1903, which had been placed in cold storage and were
brought out as needed.

At the close of the Exposition, December 1, 1904, New York had over
forty varieties of potatoes as well as many other vegetables on
exhibition that were gathered in 1903, having been out of the ground
over fifteen months. To the inexperienced eye, they could not be
distinguished from the crop of 1904. In October and November, New York's
vegetable display was unusually fine. The judges who passed upon it said
it was the finest collection of vegetables they had ever seen.


AWARDS

The catalogue of exhibitors which follows shows conclusively that New
York is truly the Empire State so far as agricultural products are
concerned. It was the only State that was awarded a grand prize on fresh
vegetables alone. J. M. Thorburn & Co., of New York, Glendale Stock
Farm, Glens Falls, and Cornell University, Ithaca, also received grand
prizes on vegetables.

_Catalogue of the Exhibitors in the Department of Agriculture, with
the Award, if Any, Received by Each_


GROUP EIGHTY-FOUR

_Vegetable Food Products--Agricultural Seeds_

Alms House Farm, Varyburg
    Wheat
    Oats--White Michigan
J. B. Anderson, Kennedy. Bronze medal
    Barley--Six-Rowed
    Oats--Swedish
R. I. Anderson, Florida
    Corn--Eight-Rowed Red
C. S. Baldwin, Wellsville. Bronze medal
    Corn--Red Glazed, ears
W. H. Bellamy, Wellsville. Bronze medal
    Oats--Swede, White Russian
F. J. Bellinger, Hammond. Silver medal
    Oats--Clydesdale
E. A. Bentley, Wellsville. Bronze medal
    Corn--Eight-Rowed Yellow, ears
T. T. Blodgett, Fishkill. Silver medal
    Rye--Dark
    Oats--White Swede
L. G. Brainard, Ellington. Silver medal
    Rye--Winter
C. E. H. Breckon, Clarence. Bronze medal
    Beans--White Kidney
Charles Brian, Perry. Silver medal
    Wheat--Klondike
Briggs Bros., Rochester. Bronze medal
    Corn--Leaming, Golden Beauty
George Bronson & Son, Bath. Bronze medal
    Oats--New Lincoln
    Buckwheat--Gray
    Wheat--Gold Coin
    Corn--Dibbs' Ninety-Day-Eight-Rowed Yellow, ears
L. M. Bronson, Bath
    Wheat--White Winter
Brooks Bros., Painted Post. Silver medal
    Wheat--Gold Bullion
    Buckwheat--Silver Gray
    Corn--Red Beauty Pop
    Oats--Russian, Lincoln, White Swede
George W. Brooks, Painted Post. Bronze medal
    Buckwheat--Silver Gray
    Beans--Coffee
    Mustard--Black
M. D. Bennett, Elmira, R. F. D. No. 1. Silver medal
    Buckwheat--Silver Hull, Japanese
Lewis J. Brundage, Starkey. Silver medal
    Wheat--Duck
    Buckwheat--Silver Gray
    Wheat--Gold Coin, Prosperity
    Barley--Two Rowed
    Beans--Red Kidney, White Kidney, Marrow
    Barley--Hulless
R. R. Buck, Warsaw. Gold medal
    Wheat
Isaac Budlong, Scottsville. Bronze medal
    Wheat--Prosperity
W. Carroll, LaGrangeville. Bronze medal
    Oats.--White
    Corn.--Early Mastadon, ears
Charles Caswell, Abbott. Bronze medal
    Corn.--White Red Glaze, ears
W. L. Chapin, Warsaw. Silver medal
    Wheat.--Malay Winter
Perry E. Chappel, Warsaw. Silver medal
    Wheat.--Fultz
D. E. Chase, Warsaw. Silver medal
    Wheat.-Red Clawson
    Oats.--Lincoln
C. W. Clark, Skaneateles. Silver medal
    Collection of Teasels
J. H. Clute, Painted Post. Bronze medal
    Corn.--Twelve-Rowed Yellow
    Wheat.-Long Medt
    Beans.--Burlingame's Prolific, Marrow
Miles Colburn, Ellington. Bronze medal
    Oats.--Early Siberian
Harry Cole, Caneadea
    Corn.--Yellow, ears
M. D. Corbett, Bath. Silver medal
    Rye.--White
Cornell University, Ithaca. Bronze medal
    Wheat.--White Chall Medt, Reliable
F. H. Crowley, Painted Post. Bronze medal
    Corn.--Eight-Rowed Yellow
    Buckwheat.--Silver Hull, Small Silver Gray
E. Crippen, Horseheads. Bronze medal
    Wheat.--Clawson
Crossman Bros., Rochester. Grand prize
    Field, Garden, and Flower Seeds
    Peas.--Crossman's First and Best, Crossman's Extra Early
      True, Early Kent, Early June, Dan O'Rourke, Philadelphia
      Extra Early, Alaska, Grandun, American Wonder, Nott's Excelsior,
      Extra Early Premium Gem, McLean's Little Gem, Surprise
      or Eclipse, Tom Thumb, Abundance, Advancers McLeans,
      Dwarf Daisy, Dwarf Champion, Everbearing, Heroine, Horsford's
      Market Garden, Pride of the Market, Stratagem Imp,
      Shropshire Hero, Yorkshire Hero, Duke of Albany, Telephone,
    Telegraph, Champion of England, Forty Fold, Long Island
      Mammoth, Large White Marrowfat, Black-Eyed Marrowfat,
      Canada Field, Mammoth Podded Sugar, Melting Sugar, Dwarf
      Gray-Seeded Sugar, Tall Gray-Seeded Sugar, Laxton's Alpha
    Beans.--Early Dwarf Prolific Black Wax or Butter, Early
      Dwarf, Challenge Black Wax or Butter, Early Pencil Pod
      Black Wax, Early Dwarf Improved Golden Wax, Early Dwarf
      Black-Eyed Wax, Early Dwarf Golden-Eyed Wax, Early
      Dwarf Red Flageolet Wax, Early Dwarf Refugee Wax, Early
      Dwarf Wardwell's Kidney Wax, Early Dwarf Dair's White
      Kidney Wax, Yosemite Mammoth Wax, Improved Early Red
      Valentine, Early Mohawk, Early Yellow Six Weeks, Early
      China Red-Eye, Early Refugee, Burpee's Stringless Green Pod,
      Refugee or Thousand to One, Dwarf Horticultural, Broad
      Windsor, Improved Red Kidney, Royal Dwarf or White
      Kidney, White Marrowfat, White Medium, Boston Small Pea
      Bean, Henderson's Dwarf Lima, Burpee's Bush Lima, Dreer's
      Bush Lima, New Prolific Pickle, Coffee or Sofa Bean, New
      Golden Cluster Wax, German Black Wax, Horticultural or
      Speckled Cranberry, Kentucky Wonder, Lazy Wife's, Lima
      Early Jersey, Lima King of the Garden, Lima Large White,
      Lima Dreer's Improved, Lima Small or Sieve, Southern Prolific,
      Scarlet Runners, White Dutch Runners, Dutch Case Knife,
      Red Speckled cut Short or Corn Hill
    Corn.--First of All, Adams' Extra Early, Early Red Cory,
      Early White Cory, Early Mammoth White Cory, Early Marblehead,
      Early Minnesota, Early Adams, Early Sweet or Sugar,
      Shakers' Early, Perry's Hybrid or Ballard, Crosby's Early,
      Moore's Early Concord, Early Mammoth, Black Mexican,
      Crossman's Genesee Sweet, Stowell's Evergreen, Country Gentleman,
      Large Late Mammoth, Clark's None Such, Egyptian
      or Washington Mammoth, Hickox's Improved, Old Colony,
      Parshing White Pearl, Parshing White Rice, Angel of Midnight
      Yellow Dent, Extra Early Huron Yellow Dent, King
      of the Earliest Yellow Dent, Golden Beauty Yellow Dent,
      Golden Dent Yellow Dent, Longfellow Yellow Flint, Leaming
      Improved Yellow Dent, Pride of the North Yellow Dent, Sanford
      White Flint, Mastadon, Improved Hickory King White
      Dent, Iowa Red Mine Yellow Dent, Golden Dew Drop, Southern
      Sheep Tooth, Red Cob Ensilage, Sweet or Sugar
    Cow Peas.--Black, Black Eyed, Clay, Whip-Poor-Will,
      Wonderful
    Buckwheat.--New Japanese, Silver Hull
    Artichoke.--French Green Globe
    Asparagus.--Conover's Colossal, Palmetto, Barr's Mammoth,
      Columbian Mammoth White
    Beets.--Eclipse, Dark Red Egyptian Turnip, Crosby's Dark
      Red Egyptian, Crimson Globe, Detroit Dark Red Turnip, Edmand's
      Blood Turnip, Extra Early Turnip Bassano, Early
      Blood Turnip Bastians, Lentz's Early Blood Turnip, Dewing's
      Early Blood Turnip, Long Dark Blood, Red Globe, Yellow,
      Mammoth Long Red, Norbitian Giant Long Red, Yellow Ovoid,
      Golden Tankard, French White Sugar, Lane's Improved White
      Sugar, Vilmorin's Improved White Sugar, Klein Wanzleben
    Broccoli.--Early Purple Cape, Early Large White
    Brussells Sprouts.--Tall Extra, Dwarf Improved
    Cabbage.--Early Jersey Wakefield, Early Large Charleston
      Wakefield, Early Express, All Seasons, Premium Flat Dutch,
      Louisville Drumhead, Danish Round Winter or Baldhead,
      Stone Mason Marblehead, Hollander
    Carrots.--Chantenay, Half Long Scarlet, Early Scarlet
      Short Horn, Danvers Half Long Orange, Mastodon White
      Intermediate, Large White Belgian
    Cauliflower.--Early London or Dutch
    Celery.--Golden Self-Blanching, French, Golden Heart or
      Golden Dwarf, Sandringham Dwarf White, Golden Rose or
      Rose-Ribbed Paris
    Corn Salad.--Large Seeded, Improved Green Cabbaging
    Cucumbers.--Cumberland, Early Russian, Green Cluster,
      Green Prolific, Jersey Pickling, Early Frame, Early White
      Spice, Livingston's Emerald, Nichol's Medium Green, Long
      Green
    Chicory.--Large Rooted
    Collards.--True Georgia or Creole
    Cress.--Curled or Peppergrass, True Water Cress
    Egg Plant.--Improved New York Purple Spineless
    Endive.--White Curled
    Kale.--Semi-Dwarf Moss Curled
    Kohl Rabi.--Early White Vienna
    Leek.--Large Carentan Winter
    Lettuce.--Crossman's New Improved, Early White Cabbage,
      Early Curled Simpson, Black-Seeded Simpson, Early Prize
      Head, Big Boston, Grand Rapids, All the Year Round, Yellow-Seeded
      Butter
      Musk Melons.--Extra Early Hackensack, Fine Large Green
       Nutmeg, Baltimore Acme Cantaloupe, Jenny Lind, Montreal
      Market, Bay View, Cosmopolitan, Long Island Beauty, Paul
      Rose or Petoskey, Delmonico, Early Christiana, Banana, Tip
      Top
    Water Melons.--Cole's Early, Green Gold, Florida Favorite,
      Pride of Georgia, Hungarian Honey, Seminole, Black Spanish,
      Phinney's Early, Ice Cream White-Seeded, jumbo or Jones,
      Striped Gipsy, Georgia Rattle Snake, Mammoth Iron Clad,
      Kolba Gem, New Dixie, Volga, Kleckley's Sweet, Iceberg
    Mustard.--White London or English, Giant Southern Curled
      Mushroom Spawn.--Best English
    Okra.--White Velvet Pod
    Parsley.--Champion Moss-Curled
    Parsnips.--Long White Dutch, Imp. Hollow Crown, Guernsey or Cup
    Pumpkins.--Imp. Cushaw, Mammoth Tours, King of Mammoth,
      Connecticut Field
    Onions.--Early Red Globe, Large Red Wethersfield, Yellow
      Dutch or Strasburg, Yellow Danvers, Yellow Danvers Globe,
      Prize Taker, White Globe, White Portugal or Silver Skin,
      New White Queen, Bermuda White, Large Italian, Large Dark
      Red Bassano
    Peppers.--Large Bell or Bull Nose
    Radishes.--Early Scarlet Globe, White-Tipped Scarlet Turnip,
      Golden Globe Turnip-Rooted, French Breakfast, Early
      Deep Scarlet, White Strasburg or Hospital White Stuttgart,
      Large Scarlet Short Top, Long Brightest Scarlet, Long White
      Vienna or Lady Finger, New Chartier or Sheppard, Long
      White Naples, Chinese Rose Winter, California Mammoth
      White Winter, Japanese Early Mammoth Sakura Jima
    Rhubarb.--Lennaens, Victoria Myatts, St. Martins
    Salsify.-Salsify or Vegetable Oyster, Mammoth Sandwich
      Island
    Spinach.--New Giant, Prickley or Winter, Long Standing,
      Victoria Long Standing, New Zealand
    Squash.--Early Yellow Bush Scallop, Early White Bush
      Scallop, Early Golden Crookneck, Early White Crookneck,
      Mammoth Golden Crookneck, Perfect Gem, Boston Marrow,
      Hubbard Improved, Warty Hubbard, Pike's Peak or Sibley,
      Turban or Turk's Cap, Butman
    Tobacco.--Connecticut Seed Leaf, Conqueror, Little Dutch,
      Orinoco Yellow, Tuckahoe, White Burley
      Sunflowers.-Mammoth Russian
    Tomatoes.-Dwarf Monarch, Matchless, Dwarf Aristocrat,
      Long Keeper, Early Atlantic Prize, New Stone, Ignotum,
      Paragon, Scoville's Hubird, Trophy, Queen Red, Acme, Dwarf
      Champion, Imperial, Ponderosa, Golden Queen or Sunrise,
      Peach, Plum-Shaped Yellow, Red Cherry, Strawberry or
      Ground Cherry
    Turnips.--Milan Extra Early, Purple Top, Early White Flat
      Dutch Strap Leaf, Early Six Weeks or Snowball, Purple Top
      Strap Leaf, Purple Top White Globe, Purple Top Scotch or
      Aberdeen, Amber Globe, Seven Top, Skirving's Imp. Purple
      Top, White Sweet or White Russian, Sweet German
  Miscellaneous
    Beggar Weed
    Broom Corn.--Evergreen
    Canary
    Chafas
    Hemp--Russian
    Honey Locust
    Kaffir Corn--White, Red
    Osage--Orange
    Rape--Dwarf Essex
    Sugar Cane--Early Amber, Orange, Teosinte
    Vetches--Spring
    Wild Rice
    Herbs--Anise, Balm, Borage, Caraway, Chervil Curled,
      Coriander, Dill, Horehound, Lavender, Rosemary, Rue, Sage
      (English Broadleaf), Summer Savory, Sweet Basil, Sweet Fennel,
      Sweet Marjoram, Tansy, Thyme (Broadleaf) Wormwood
    Grasses--Red Top Fancy Clean, Kentucky Blue Fancy
      Clean, Bermuda Grass, Fescue Meadow, Orchard Grass, Rye
      Grass (Perennial), Sweet Vernal, Hungarian Grass, Millet
      (German, Golden Japanese, Barnyard, Siberian), Lawn Grass
      (Crossman's Park Mixture), Rye Grass (Italian)
    Clovers.--White Dutch, Alsike or Swedish, Alfalfa or
      Lucerne, Crimson, Medium Red, Timothy
    Flower Seeds.--Abronia Umbellata, Ageratune Mexicanum
      Blue, Alyssum Sweet, Amaranthus, Antirrhinum Majus Snap
      Dragon, Asters (Branching Mixed), Balsam Double Mixed,
      Bartonia Aurea, Calendula Prince of Orange, Calliopsis Mixed,
      Canary Bird Flower, Candytuft (White, Mixed), Canna Mixed,
      Carnation Mixed, Celosia Dwarf Mixed Cockscomb, Centanrea,
      Cyanns Bachelor Button, Cobaea Scandens Purple, Cosmos
      Mixed, Cypress Vine Mixed, Double Daisy Mixed, Eschscholtzia
      Californica, Gaillardia Lorensiana, Gomphrena Globosa,
      Gourd (Apple Shaped, Bottle Shaped, Dipper Shaped, Egg
      White, Hercules Club, Mock Orange, Pear Shape, Sugar
      Trough), Helichrysum, Hollyhock Double Mixed Chaters, Ice
      Plant, Larkspur (Perennial Mixed), Lobelia Speciosa Crystal
      Palace, Lupinus Mixed Colors, Marigold French Dwarf, Martynia
      Probosidea, Marvel of Peru, Mixed Four O'Clock, Moon
      Flower Cross-bred or Hybrid, Mignonette Sweet Large-
      Flowered, Morning Glory, (Convolvulus Major, Giant
      Japanese), Myosotis Palastris Forget-Me-Not, Nasturtium
      (Dwarf Mixed, Tall Mixed), Pansy Very Large Flowering
      Mixed, Petunia Mixed Hybrid, Phlox Drummond Grandiflori
      Mixed, Poppy Carnation Double Mixed, Portulaca Single
      Mixed, Ricinus Sanguineus (Castor Oil Bean), Salpiglossis
      Large Mixed, Scabiosa Majus Dwarf Mixed, Smilax Boston,
      Stock German Dwarf Mixed, Sunflower Double Globosus
      Fislutosus, Swan River Daisy, Sweet William (double), Thunbergia
      Mixed, Verbenas Hybrid Mixed, Wild Cucumber,
      Quinnia Double Dwarf Mixed, Sunflower White Seeded,
      Phoenis (Reclinata, Canariensis), Dracaena (Indivisa, Australis),
      Snails, Wonus, Dolishos, Lablab White, Lagums
      Ovatus, Avena Steralis, Coix Lachrymo, Zea Japinica, Ameranthus
      Candatus
    Sweet Peas.--America, Broeatton, Emily Eckford, Fire Fly,
      Katherine Tracy, Navy Blue, Queen of England, Crossman's
      Special Mixed
James J. Culbertson, Groveland. Silver medal
    Wheat.--Gold Bullion, Dawson's Golden Chaff
    Beans.--Marrow
Frank H. Cupp, Painted Post. Bronze medal
    Rye.--White
Albert J. Davis, Spencerport. Bronze medal
    Corn
Hiram Davis, Gansevoort. Bronze medal
    Corn
C. A. Davidson, Caton. Bronze medal
    Oats
W. H. Dettoes, Johnsonville. Bronze medal
    Corn
Henry Drudge, Clarence. Bronze medal
    Buckwheat
J. H. Durkee, Florida. Silver medal
    Wheat
F. E. Ebbing, Syracuse. Silver medal
    Seeds
Wm. Edminster, Painted Post. Silver medal
    Wheat and Oats
Frank H. Emery, Hornellsville. Silver medal
    Wheat
G. W. Engdalil, Ellington. Silver medal
    Barley and Oats
Frank A. Erwire, Painted Post. Silver medal
    Oats
P. E. Eysaman, Hammond. Bronze medal
    Corn
James Faucett, Bath. Silver medal
    Oats
Henry M. Fisher, Warsaw. Gold medal
    Wheat
Frank E. Ford, Painted Post. Bronze medal
    Grain
M. C. Frisbee, Ellington. Bronze medal
    Barley
M. E. Ferguson, Florida. Silver medal
    Wheat and Oats
M. L. Gamble, Groveland. Bronze medal
    Beans
John Gerow, Washingtonville. Bronze medal
    Corn
M. O. Gilbert, Ellington. Gold medal
    Buckwheat
Samuel Green, Florida. Bronze medal
    Buckwheat
John E. Griffith, Ellington. Silver medal
    Oats
L. P. Gunson & Co., Rochester. Gold medal
    Oats
W. H. Haight, Fishkill. Bronze medal
    Wheat
W. H. Hall, Bath. Bronze medal
    Wheat
G. L. Halstead, Arlington. Bronze medal
    Wheat
J. M. Ham, Washington Hollow. Bronze medal
    Rye
George Harder, Bath. Bronze medal
    Wheat
A. G. Happul, Johnsonville. Bronze medal
    Corn
E. P. Harris, Elmira. Gold medal
    Beans
Charles Hathaway, Hartford. Bronze medal
    Oats
I. C. Hawkins, Middletown. Bronze medal
    Corn
Joe Hetzel, Florida. Silver medal
    Rye and Corn
J. M. Hewlett, Bath. Bronze medal
    Wheat
G. K. Higbie, Rochester. Gold medal
    Oats
C. B. Hill, Wellsville. Bronze medal
    Oats
Frank N. Holbrook, Charlton. Silver medal
    Buckwheat
John Houston, Florida. Bronze medal
    Grain
James K. Houston, Goshen. Silver medal
    Rye and Oats
J. C. Howard, Irondequoit. Silver medal
    Corn and Beans
John S. Howell, Elmira. Bronze medal
    Wheat
George W. Humphrey, Warsaw. Bronze medal
    Oats
C. L. Jesup, Florida
    Corn.--Peachblow, ears
    Wheat.--No. 2, Red
Fred Johannes, Filmore. Silver medal
    Barley.--Black
    Buckwheat.--Gray, Silver Hull
    Oats.--Clydesdale
Peter Johnson, Florida
    Buckwheat.--Silver Hull, Silver Gray
    Corn.--Extra Early Evergreen Sweet
A. N. Jones, LeRoy. Grand Prize
    Wheat
John Jones, Meriden. Bronze medal.
    Oats.--Pride of England
    Wheat.--Farmer's Friend
N. B. Keeney & Son, LeRoy. Gold medal
    Beans.--Saddle Back Wax, White Kidney, Dwarf Horticulture,
      Bush, Bismarck, Snow Flake Pea, Burpee's New Stringless
      Green Pod, Crimson Flageolet, Boston Small Pod, China Red
      Eye, Grant's Stringless Green Pod, Red Valentine, Celestial
      Wax, Improved Golden Wax, Currie's Rust Proof Wax, Improved
      Horticulture, Improved Black Wax, Burlingame's
      Medium, Early Mohawk, Davis Wax, Pencil Pod Black Wax,
      Golden-Eyed Wax, Golden Refugee, Maule's Butter Wax,
      Keeney's Rustless Golden Wax, White Wax, Longfellow Bush,
      Round Pod Kidney Wax, Round Pod Refugee, Brittle Wax,
      Yosemite Mammoth Wax, Extra Early Refugee, Challenger
      Black Wax, Flageolet Wax, Keeney's Stringless Refugee Wax
    Peas.--Abundance, Admiral, Advancer, Alaska, Ameer,
      American Champion, American Wonder, British Wonder,
      Champion of England, Claudit, Duke of Albany, Duke of York,
      Ever Bearing, Nott's Excelsior, Extra Early Pedigree, Extra
      Early Trial Ground, First and Best, Forcing Suttons, Forty-Fold,
      Glory, Gradus or Prosperity, Heroine, Hurst William,
      Juno, Prolific Laxtons, Laxton, Thos., Long Island Mammoth,
      Market Garden, Horsfords, Marrowfat (Black-Eyed, Early
      Marblehead, White), Premium Gem, Pride of the Market,
      Profusion, Prolific Early Market, Reliance Hursts, Seedling
      Suttons, Senator Improved, Shropshire Hero, Station, Stratagem,
      Sugar Mammoth Podded, Surprise Gregorys, Telegraph,
      Telephone, Tom Thumb, Yorkshire Hero
C. E. Knapp, Little Britain. Bronze medal
    Corn.--White Flint, ears
Frank Lawrence, Ellington. Bronze medal
    Barley.--Beardless
    Oats.--Siberian
E. D. Lee, Whitesville
    Corn.--White Flint, ears
James Livingston, Cobleskill. Silver medal
    Flax
    Timothy
Charles Lovell, Painted Post. Silver medal
    Oats.--English Wonder
    Wheat.--Gold Bullion
D. Macbeth, Kanona. Bronze medal
    Wheat.--Clawson
Mrs. S. E. Manning, Elmira Heights. Gold medal
    Wheat.--Red Russian
Frank Marley, Hornellsville
    Corn.--Red Blaze
Charles Martin, Hartford. Silver medal
    Beans.--Apple
Fred Martin, Fort Ann
    Corn.--King Phillip
Will Martin, Hartford
    Oats.--Lincoln
Jacob Marzolf, Clarence Center. Bronze medal
    Wheat.--Hundred Mark
E. P. Mattice, Middlebury
    Wheat.--Genesee Giant
Harry J. McCann, Elmira. Bronze medal
    Corn.--Queen's Golden Pop, Queen's Golden, ears
    Pumpkin.--Red Field
James McCann, Elmira. Silver medal
    Corn.--Klondike
    Buckwheat.--Gray
    Rye.--White
John McCann, Elmira. Silver medal
    Wheat.--Rochester Red, Clawson, Golden Coin
    Corn.--White Cap Yellow Dent, Queen's Golden Pop, ears,
      White Pearl Pop, ears
    Buckwheat.--Japanese
    Clover.--Crimson
    Beans.--Red Marrow, Gold Eye
    Rye.--Dark
    Oats.--Banner
S. J. McChesney, Kanona. Silver medal
    Wheat.--White Winter
John McConkie, Galway. Silver medal
    Oats.--White Swede, Welcome
E. J. McLean, Troupsburg. Silver medal
    Beans.--White Kidney
    Barley.--Black
    Buckwheat.--Silver Gray, Silver Hull
    Corn.--Pop Corn, ears
Stephen Merchant, Burnt Hills. Silver medal
    Rye.--White
D. W. Miller, Boonville. Bronze medal
    Oats.--Arctic
Romantie Miller, Scottsville. Bronze medal
    Wheat.--Longberry Red
George E. Minard, Filmore. Silver medal
    Barley.--Black, Beardless, Giant White
    Corn.---Yellow Flint, ears
Howard Moore, Cobleskill. Bronze medal
    Corn.--Early Sunset Yellow
J. W. Moore, Fishkill Village. Bronze medal
    Wheat.--Gold Coin, White Winter
    Rye.--White Winter
    Corn.--White Dent, ears
Daniel Morris, Groveland. Bronze medal
    Wheat.--No. 8 Red Winter
Munger Bros., Warsaw. Silver medal
    Barley.--Beardless
    Oats.--Golden Prolific
J. Myers, Warnersville. Silver medal
    Beans.--Red Kidney
New York State Grange. Butler grand prize banner
    Collection of Grains
E. E. Nichols, South Onondaga. Bronze medal
    Rye.--Dark
    Wheat.--Gold Chaff, Red Winter
    Oats.--Swede, Lincoln, White Russian
    Peas.--Small Field
    Buckwheat.--Japanese
    Corn.--Eight-Rowed White Ears, Early Red Cory Sweet, 1900
    Sweet, Monarch Sweet
Will Norton, Hartford. Bronze medal
    Barley.--Beardless
    Oats.--Lincoln
Oatka Farm, Scottsville. Silver medal
    Rye.--Dark
    Wheat.--Dawson's Golden Chaff
Hugh Osborne, East Hartford. Bronze medal
    Corn.--Atwood, ears
F. R. Payne, White Plains. Silver medal
    Beans.--White Marrowfat
Charles Perry, Wyoming. Silver medal
    Wheat.--Dawson's Golden Chaff
N. S. Pierson, Painted Post. Silver medal
    Rye.--Dark
I. B. Pipe, Prattsburg. Silver medal
    Buckwheat.--Silver Hull
    Oats.--Twentieth Century
F. C. Platt, Painted Post. Bronze medal
    Oats.--Golden
J. P. Platt, Bath. Gold medal
    Wheat.--Gold Coin
G. Pollock, East Hartford. Bronze medal
    Oats.--Probister
Peter Prechtel, Elmira. Bronze medal
    Wheat.--Clawson
Frank Qua, East Hartford
    Oats.--Swede, White Star
George R. Qua, Hartford. Gold medal
    Rye.--Siberian
G. L. Quick, Rochester Junction. Gold medal
    Wheat.--Dawson's Golden Chaff
    Oats.--Clydesdale
Anson Reed, Kanona. Silver medal
    Beans.--White Kidney, Golden Eyed
James H. Russell, Hopewell Junction. Bronze medal
    Corn.--Early Mastodon, ears
H. Brown Richardson, Lowville. Silver medal
    Maple Sugar
    Maple Syrup
John K. Roe, Florida. Bronze medal
    Corn.--Queen's Golden Pop
E. N. Rollins, Andover. Silver medal
    Wheat.--Gold Coin
W. H. Roper, Wyoming. Silver medal
    Oats.--Siberian
    Wheat.--Genesee Giant
M. J. Sahler, Pattan Kunk. Silver medal
    Oats.--Twentieth Century, American Improved
    Buckwheat.--Japanese
Chas. F. Saul, Syracuse
  Seeds
    Peas.--Yorkshire Heroes, Everbearing, Telephone, McLean's
      Advancers, Extra Early Premium Gem, Duke of York, Juno,
      First and Best, McLean's Little Gem, Alaska, Prosperity, Champion
      of England, Black-Eyed Marrowfat, American Wonder,
      Horsford's Market Garden, Philadelphia Extra Early, Nott's
      Excelsior
    Beans.--Red Kidney, Large Lima, Long Yellow Six Weeks,
      Horticultural, Henderson's Bush Lima, Sofa
    Spelt
    Rye.--Spring
    Clover.--Medium, Mammoth, Crimson, White
    Grass.--Orchard
    Corn.--Eight-Rowed Yellow, Black Mexican
    Barley.--Imperial Two-Rowed, Fancy Red Top
    Wheat.--Spring
    Kentucky Blue Grass
    Hemp
    Lettuce.--Boston
    Onion.--Red Wethersfield
    Squash.--Summer Crookneck, Hubbard
    Canary Seed
    Rape.--Dwarf Essex
    Melon.--Rockford
    Watermelon.--Ice Cream, Cobb's Gem
    Celery
    Beet
    Carrot
    Salsify
    Parsnip.--Hollow Crown
    Spinach
    Radish
    Turnip
    Cow Peas
    Field Pumpkin
    Millet.--Japan
    Cucumber.--Early Cluster
    Kaffir Corn
    Timothy
Will Saville, Hartford. Bronze medal
    Corn.--White Cap Dent
Sidney Schell, Theresa
    Oats.-Mortgage Lifter
I. L. Schofield, Wappingers Falls. Bronze medal
    Buckwheat.--Japanese
C. E. Schultz, Florida. Bronze medal
    Corn.--Eight-Rowed Yellow
R. F. Seeley, Waterloo. Silver medal
    Timothy
    Rye.--Mammoth White
    Corn.--Eight-Rowed Yellow
    Wheat.--Jones' Winter Fife, American Bronze
    Beans.--Red Kidney
    Buckwheat.--Japanese
Chas. J. Settle, Cobleskill
    Rye.--White
S. C. Shaver, Albany. Gold medal
    Hops.--Albany
A. M. Sleight, Arlington. Bronze medal
    Corn.--Eight-Rowed Yellow, ears
Fred W. Smith, Scottsville
    Oats.--Genesee Valley White
Ward L. Snyder, Carlisle Center. Bronze medal
    Oats.--Twentieth Century, Italian
Ed. Stevens, Warsaw. Bronze medal
    Buckwheat.--Gray
F. C. Stevens, Attica. Silver medal
    Wheat.--Silver Chaff, No. 6
    Rye.--Winter, Dark
Henry Stewart, Kanona. Gold medal
    Wheat.--Red Winter
    Barley
T. L. Stone, Craig Colony, Sonyea. Silver medal
    Corn.-Shakers' Pride, Pride of the North, White Shaker
    Wheat.--Red Winter Fife, Red Winter No. 8
    Oats.--Mixed
Stumpp & Walter Co., New York city. Gold medal
  Seeds
    Corn.--Evergreen Brown, Red Kaffir, White Kaffir, Snow
      White Dent, Stowell's Evergreen, Iowa Gold Mine, Yellow
      Dent, Improved Longfellow, Southern Horse Tooth, Cory
      White Cob, Metropolitan, Yellow Mills Maize
    Clover.--White Dutch, Red, Crimson
    Millet.--German or Golden, Japanese
    Grass.--Italian Rye, Rough Stalked Meadow, Orchard,
      Creeping Bent, Shady Place, Permanent Pasture, Rhode Island
      Bent, English Rye, Kentucky Blue, Canada Blue, English Cow,
      Hungarian
    Hard Fescue
    Timothy.--Fancy
    Recleaned Red Top
    Alfalfa
    Alsike
    Red Fescue
    Meadow Fescue
    Peas.--Daniel O'Rourke, American Wonder, Black-Eyed
      Cow, Canada Field, Telephone, Black-Eyed Marrowfat, Dwarf
      Sugar, Blue Beauty, Bliss Everbearing, Juno, Alaska, Nott's
      Excelsior, Horseford's Golden, Little Gem, Heroine, First
      of All
    Beans.--Davis Kidney Wax, Best of All, Improved Golden
      Wax, Early Long Yellow Six Weeks, Red Valentine, Dwarf
      Horticultural, King of the Garden, Early Refugee, Improved
      Black Wax, Early Green Sofa, Velvet, Stringless Green Pod,
      Early Mohawk, Refugee or 1000 to 1, Burpee's Bush Lima,
      Lazy Wife, Bountiful
    Oats.--Clydesdale, Russian, Lincoln
    Sun Flower.--Mammoth Russian
    Sea Island Cotton
    Hemp
    Wheat.--Silver Sheaf Winter, Red Winter, Jones' Red
      Chief, Saskatchewan
    Barley.--Champion Beardless
    Rice.--Unhulled
    Pumpkin.--Large Cheese, Connecticut Field
    Radish.--Early Scarlet Turnip, White-Tipped
    Teosinte
    Peas.--Sweet
    Sorghum.--Early Amber, Early Orange
    Spinach.--Roundleaf, Norfolk Savoy, Long Standing,
      Verofly
    Australian Salt Bush
    Rye.--Winter, Dark
    Turnip.--Improved Purple Top Rutabaga, Yellowstone
    Beet.--Mammoth Long Red Mangel, Champion Yellow
      Globe
    Parsley.--Double-Curled
    Lettuce.--California Cream Butter, Early Curled Simpson
    Buckwheat.--Japanese
    Field Lupins
    Onions.--Wethersfield
    Sainfoin
    Amber Cane
    Salsify.--Sandwich Island
C. O. Taylor, Petrolia. Bronze medal
    Oats.--Siberian
Morrison Taylor, Florida. Bronze medal
    Corn.--Eight Rowed Yellow
J. M. Thorburn & Co., New York city. Grand prize
  Field, Garden and Flower Seeds
    Bermuda.--Cedar
    Radish.--Early Turnip, Early Deep Blood Turnip, Half Long
      Delicacy, White Tipped, Non Plus Ultra, Round Scarlet China,
      Scarlet Turnip, Scarlet Globe, Olive Shaped Golden Yellow,
      Olive Shaped Red Rocket, White Tipped Scarlet, French
      Breakfast, Golden Summer, Scarlet Forcing, Winter, White
      Winter, White Olive Shaped, Black Spanish, Long White Icicle,
      White Tipped Summer White, Tipped Turnip, Long White
      Russian, Scarlet Chinese Winter, Woods Early Frame
    Lapania Borbonica
    Salsify.--Long White French
    Yellow Locust
    Cabbage.--Cow
    Beet.--Mammoth Long Red Mangel Wurzel, Queen of Denmark
      Sugar, Columbia, Golden Fleshed Globe Mangel Wurzel,
      Golden Tankard Mangel Wurzel, Red Globe Mangel Wurzel,
      Turin
    Tomato.--Blush Lemon, Aristocrat, Fagmore, Scarlet, Yellow
      Plum, Democrat, Thorburn's Novelty, Thorburn's 1903,
      Thorburn's Rosalind, Waldorf
    Parsley.--Moss Curled
    Asparagus
    Marigold.--Eldorado
    Coffee Tree.--Kentucky
    Millet.--Barn Yard, Red Siberian
    Watermelon.--Imperial, Iron Clad, Dark Iceing, Triumph,
      Hungarian, Van Cluse
    Cucumber.--Small Gerkin, White Pearl
    Oats.--Silver Mine, Black Tartarian
    Squash.--Marblehead, White Chestnut, Canada Crookneck,
      Pineapple, Orange Marrow, Red China, Perfect Gem, Butmans,
      Pikes Peak, Der Wing, The Faxon, Japan Turban, French
      Olive
    Silver Maple
    Juglans Cardifornus
    Celery.--Cooper's Cutting, Thorburn's Fin de Siecle
    Sorrel.--Garden
    Mignonette
    Sun Flower.--Large Russian
    Musk Melon.--Pineapple, Golden Gate
    Teosinte
    Grass.--Ribbed, Red Fescue, Meadow Fescue, Pepper, Hungarian
    Curled Chervil
    Borage
    Pepper.--Sweet Spanish
    Caraway
    Savory.--Summer
    Aera Caespitosa
    French Thyme
    Wheat.--Premium Red New York, Ruperts Giant, Red
      Rover
    Poppy.--Double Peony Flowered
    Calendula.--Prince of Orange
    Koelreuteria Paniculata
    Rough Rice
    Chicory.--Large Rooted
    Lettuce.--Thorburn's Mammoth Black Seeded, Black Seeded
      Tennis Ball, Thorburn's Maxumum, Hammersmith's Hardy,
      Green
    Carrot.--Bellot, Carentan
    Anthoxanthum Oderatum
    Cherry.--Mahaleb
    Coliander
    Beech.--American
    Crab Apple.--French
    Cherry.--Black Mazzard
    Leek.--Large Flag Winter
    Dill
    Juglans.--Sieboldii
    Kentia.--Belmoreana
    Musk Melon.--Ward's Nectar
    Lupins.--Blue, White, Yellow
    Turnip.--White Norfolk, Thorburn's Improved Purple Top
      Rutabaga
    Onion.--Thorburn's Excelsior Pickling
    Lavender
    Dandelion
    Apricot Pits
    Endive.--White Curled
    Sage
    Fagus.--Sylvatica
    Lolumi.--Italicum
    Kale.--Sea
    Canary.--Sicily
    Connes Florida
    Morning Glory
    Holcus Lanatus
    Lolucui Perenis.--Thorburn's Selected Dwarf
    Prunes.--Serotina
    Rhus.--Copallina
    Clover.--Sand Crimson, Japan, White, Pea-vine
    Spinach.--Winter, Long Standing, Lettuce Leaf, New
      Zealand, Summer
    Beet.--Swiss, Chard
    Ampelopsis Hederacea
    Bene
    Gourd.--Sugar Trough, Dish Cloth, Mock Orange
    Catalpa
    Lentils.--Spanish
    Buckwheat.--Japanese, American Silver Hull
    Butternut
    Cypress.--Bald
    Rye.--Excelsior Winter
    Rice--Wild
    Elm.--Common
    Spelts
    Burnet.--Common Field
    Pumpkin.--Tennessee Sweet Potato
    Sainfoin
    Sera Della
    Spring Tares
    Fenn Greek
    Linden.--American
    Tree of Heaven
    Kentia.--Fosteriana
    Acer Coriaceum
    Australian Salt Bush
    White Birch
    Timothy.--Fancy
    Mushroom.--French Spawn
    Spurry-Spergula Arvensis
    Scotch Broom
    Pinus.--Maritima
    Candytuft
    Festuca Ovina
    Alsike.--Clover
    Abies.--Nordmanniana
    Cynosurus Ciristatus
    Alfalfa
    Kohl Rabi.--Large White
    Acer.--Campestre
    Calendula
    Mustard.---Broad Leaved
    Corylus.--American
    Aster
    Alopecurus Pralensis
    Pinus.--Cembra
    Poppy
    Nasturtium.--Tall Mixed
    Sweet Marjoram
    French Pear
    Virginian Stock
    Pinus.--Pinea
    Parsnip.--Hollow Crown
    Scorzouena
    Acer.--Pseudo-platanus
    Bromus Mollis
    Cauliflower.--Gilt Edged
    Laburnum
    Anemone Coronaria
    Poa Trivialis
    Jute
    Almes.--Oregonia
    Thea Viridis
    Brussells Sprouts
    Faximus Excelsior
    Calleopsis
    Anise
    Convolvulus.--Tricolor
    Poa Annua
    Sweet Fennel
    Tulip Tree
    Peas.--Stratagem, William Hurst, Prince of Wales, Horseford's
      Market Garden, Thorburn's Early Market, Sweet, Blue
      Beauty, Dr. McLean's, Alaska, Yorkshire Hero, Telephone,
      Premium Gem, Juno, McLean's Advancers, Clay Cow, Queen,
      Champion of England, American Wonder, Alpha, Telegraph,
      Pride of the Market, Heroine, Duke of Albany, Abundance,
      Nott's Excelsior, Gregory's Surprise, Gradus, Everbearing,
      Magnum Bonum
    Corn.--Leaming, Virginia Horse Tooth, Snow Flake, Early
      Yellow Canada, Farmer's Favorite, Compton's Early Flint,
      Sanford's White Flint, Angel of Midnight, Hickory King,
      White Surprise, Longfellow, Thorburn's White Flint, Mastodon
      Dent, Golden Beauty, Stowell's Evergreen Sugar, Potter's
      Excelsior Sugar, Country Gentleman Sugar, Early Adams
      Sugar, Black Mexican Sugar, Egyptian Sugar, Triumph Sugar,
      Minnesota Sugar, Corn Salad, Perry's Hybrid Sweet ears,
      Black Mexican Sweet ears, Hickox Sweet ears, Early Minnesota
      Sweet ears, Early Crosby Sweet ears, Hickory King ears,
      King Phillip ears, Legal Tender ears, White Cap Yellow Dent
      ears, Compton's Early ears, Northern White Dent ears, Pride
      of the North ears, White Sanford ears
    Beans.--Tall July Runners, Vienna Forcer, Sword (Long
      Pod) Challenger Lime, Improved Golden Cluster, English
      House, Velvet Wardwell Kidney Wax, Scarlet Runner, Kentucky
      Wonder, Golden Refugee, White Snowflake, Lightning,
      Yellow Sofa, Castor, Early Valentine, Pole, Ne Plus Ultra,
      Broad Windsor, Galega, Medium Eyed Sofa, Horticultural,
      Dun Colored, Byer's Dwarf, Marvel of Paris, Dwarf Chocolate,
      Canadian Wonder, Thornburn's Dwarf Lima, Longfellow Bush,
      Longfellow Six Weeks Bush, Early Mohawk Bush, Early China
      Bush, Everbearing Bush, Improved Golden Cluster Bush,
      Medium Early Green Bush, Round Pod Kidney Wax Bush,
      Lazy Wife Pole, Golden-Eyed Wax Bush, Scarlet Runner
      (Pole), Emperor of Russia (Pole), Round Six Weeks Bush,
      Southern Creeseback Bush, 1,000 to 1 Bush, Black Velentine
      Bush, Improved Golden Wax Bush, White Kidney Bush,
      White Marrow Bush
Peter S. Tower, Youngstown. Silver medal
    Wheat.--Early Arcadian
    Corn.--Eight-Rowed Yellow, ears
Miles Townsend, Bath. Silver medal
    Wheat.--Longberry Red
Morgan Vail, Stormville. Silver medal
    Oats.--White Tartar
    Rye.--White Winter
    Corn.--White Dent, ears
Vancott Bros., LaGrangeville. Bronze medal
    Corn.--Pride of New Jersey, ears
W. H. Dueson, Le Roy. Gold medal
    Wheat.--Red Clawson
Walter Van Loon, Bath. Gold medal
    Beans.--Marrowfat
Joseph Van Wyck, Arlington. Bronze medal
    Corn.--Eight-Rowed Yellow, ears
James Vick's Sons, Rochester. Silver medal
    Clover.--Crimson
    Cane.--Amber
    Flax
    Corn.--Champion White Pearl Pop, Early Mastodon, Pride of
      the North, Kaffir
    Pea.--Large White Marrowfat, Small Field
    Beans.--Black Butter, White Kidney, Black Wax, Large Marrowfat,
      Red Kidney
    Barley.--Bulless, Manshung
    Oats.--New Banner.
    Sun Flower.--White--Beauty, Mammoth Russian
F. L. Wailt, Ellington. Bronze medal
    Wheat.--White Winter
Walter Ward, Rochester Junction. Bronze medal
    Corn.--Longfellow Yellow, ears
John B. Y. Warner, Scottsville. Silver medal
    Barley.--Beardless
Charles Watrous, Warsaw. Bronze medal
    Wheat.--Red Clawson
    Oats.--Clydesdale, Probester
Mrs. Emogene Watrous, Warsaw. Silver medal
    Wheat.
Joseph L. Weed, Ballston Spa. Bronze medal
    Corn.--Eight-Rowed Yellow, ears, Twelve-Rowed Yellow,
      ears, Eight-Rowed Yellow Dent, ears
C. Weiting, Cobleskill. Silver medal
    Wheat.--Spring Red
W. H. Wheeler, Florida. Silver medal
    Wheat.--Red Winter, Fulcastor
C. W. & C. M. Wilcox, Delhi. Silver medal
    Maple Sugar and Syrup
James Wilder, Warsaw. Silver medal
    Rye.--White
Charles Willour, Painted Post. Bronze medal
    Wheat.--Long Medt
James M. Wisner, Edenville
    Corn.--Pedrick Perfect, ears
O. M. Wixon, Elinira. Bronze medal
    Wheat.---Clawson
    Oats.--Early Scotch
C. S. Wright, Hammond
    Corn.--New England Fline, ears
Wyoming County Alms House, Varysburg. Silver medal
    Wheat and Oats
A. Young, Bath. Bronze medal
    Corn.--White Rice Pop, ears

_Vegetables_

Albany County. Silver medal
    Potatoes
Allegany County. Silver medal
    Potatoes
C. L. Allen, Sandy Hill. Silver medal
    Potatoes
C. W. Becker, Carlisle. Bronze medal
    Potatoes.--Salzer's Great Sunlight, Salzer's Million Dollar
John Bockeno, Baldwinsville. Bronze medal
    Onions.--Yellow Danvers, Prize Taker, Silver King, Southport
      Red, Southport White
F. E. Brown, Binghamton. Bronze medal
    Onions.--Red Wethersfield, Australian Brown, Yellow
      Danvers, Prize Takers, Southport White
Arthur L. Billings, Prattsburg. Silver medal
    Potatoes.--Hobson's Choice, Uncle Sam, White Gilial, New
      York Wonder, White Banner, Billings' Favorite, Billings'
      White Beauty, American Beauty, Billings' Surprise, Early
      Gem, Sir Walter Raleigh, Sampson's Best, Vick's Early Perfection,
      Beauty Hebron, Excelsior, Golden Nugget, White
      Steuben
Fred Coe, Fulton. Silver medal
    Potatoes.--Blue Victor, World's Fair Prize, Early Northern,
      Early Michigan, Carmen No. 3, Bovee, Quick Crop, Late
      Hebron, Potentate, Burpee's Superior, Green Mountain, New
      Queen, Gold Coin, Delaware
    Beets.--Turnip Blood
James E. Cole, Fulton. Bronze medal
    Tomatoes.--Golden Queen, Burpee's Matchless
    Squash.--Hubbard
Miss Mabel Churchill, Fulton. Bronze medal
    Onions.--White Globe, Yellow Globe, Red Globe, Red
      Wethersfield
    Beets.--Red Turnip
    Potatoes.--White Mammoth
Jessie T. Carrier, Fulton. Bronze medal
    Potatoes.--Quick Crop, Early Market
Chemung County. Silver medal
    Potatoes
Cortland County. Silver medal
    Potatoes
Columbia County. Silver medal
    Potatoes
Cornell University, Ithaca. Grand prize
    Beets.--Lane's Sugar, Crimson Globe, Yellow Table, Sugar,
      Detroit Red, Long Red Mangel, Golden Tankard
    Radishes.--Summer, Winter
    Squash.--Dent Marrow, Yellow Bush Scallop, White Bush
      Scallop, Summer Crookneck, Turban, Boston Marrow, Warty
      Hubbard, Hubbard, Vegetable Marrow, Ford Hook
    Citron.
    Corn.--Eight-Rowed Yellow, 90 Day Monarch, Stowell's
      Evergreen
    Beans.--Lima
    Turnips.--Rutabaga, Purple Top Strap Leaf, White Sweet
      German, Sweet Russian, White Egg
    Pumpkin.--Mammoth Chilian, Negro, Field, Mammoth
      Cheese
    Carrots.--Long Orange, Short Orange, Ox Heart
    Salsify.
    Onions.--Burpee's Australian Brown, Mammoth White,
      Yellow Danvers, Red, Mills' White Portugal, Red Victoria,
      Southport Red Globe, Red Wethersfield, Mills' New White
      Queen, Mammoth Red Pompett, Mills' Brown Wonder, Ferr's
      Early Red, Southport Yellow Globe, Mills' White Victoria,
      Burpee's Early Golden Globe, Yellow Globe Danvers, Yellow
      Dutch or Strasburg, Burpee's Cherry Pickle, Extra Early Red,
      Michigan Danvers
    Kohl Rabi.--Red, White
    Parsnips.
    Martynia.--Gourds
    Celery.--White Plume
    Turnips.--Sweet Rutabaga
    Squash.--Delicate
    Beets.--Early Egyptian, New Queen, Globe Mangel, Red
      Mangel, Red Turnip
    Squash.--Hubbard
    Turnips.--Purple Top Rutabaga, Purple Top, White Rutabaga,
      Flat Dutch, Purple Top Strap Leaf
    Pumpkin.--Field
    Potatoes.--Churchill Seedling, Rose of Erin, Uncle Sam,
      Sir Walter Raleigh, Maule's Early, Chase's Early, Pan-American,
      Early Fortune, Bliss Triumph, Nevada White, Chautauqua,
      Ohio Victor, Burpee's Perfection, Celtic Beauty, Centennial
      Blue, Livingston's Banner, Monarch of the West, Early
      Janet, Late Rose, Hammond's Early, Blue Christy, Early
      North, 20th Century, Maggie Murphy, Early Canada, Pure
      Gold, Early Vermont, Early Six Weeks, Eam's Early
    Cauliflower.
    Swiss Chard.
    Salsify.
    Okra.
    Celery.--Turnip Rooted, White Plume, Parsley
    Cabbage.--White Flat, Round White
    Leeks.
    Beets.--Sugar, Detroit Red, Long Red Mangels
    Kohl Rabi.--White
    Parsnips.
    Carrots.--White Belgian
    Onions.--Yellow, White
    Radish.--Red Chinese
    Squash.--Summer Crookneck, Marrow
    Pumpkin.--Red Gold
    Corn.--Stowell's Evergreen
    Potatoes.--Carmen No. 1, Burbanks
    Celery.--Root's
    Cabbage.--Danish Bullhead, Surehead, Autumn King
    Turnips.--Garton's Pioneer Hybrid, Magnum Bonum
      Swedes, Purple Top Cow Horn, White Cow Horn, Golden
      Ball, Hartley's Top Rutabaga, Maule's Improved Purple Top,
      Aberdeen Yellow, Garton's Monarch Rutabaga, Green Top
      Scotch Yellow
    Beets.--Golden Tankard, Sugar Beets, Garton's Long Red
      Mangel, Norbition Giant Mangels, Half Sugar Mangels, Yellow
      Globe Mangels, Chinks Castle Long Red Mangels, Sutton's
      Long Red Mangels
    Carrots.--James Intermediate, Witshire Giant White, Yellow
      Belgium, Scarlet Intermediate, Lobberich's Agricultural
    Parsnips.--Hollow Crown
Crossman Bros., Rochester. Grand prize
    Beets.--Bassano, Dewings, Egyptian Dark Red, Long Dark
      Red Blood, White French Sugar, Yellow Chilian, Swiss Chard
      or Silver
    Carrots.--Dutch Horn, Oxheart Guerands, Chautenay, Danvers
      Half Long, Long Orange, White Belgium, Chicory Large
      Rooted
    Celeriac.--Smooth Prayer
    Celery.--Paris Golden, S. B.
    Cabbage.--Red Dutch, Danish Baldhead
    Cucumbers.--Peerless White Spine, Hybrid Forcing
    Cauliflower.--Snow Ball
    Endive.--Broad Leaf Batavian, White Curled
    Kohl Rabi.--Early Purple Vienna, Large Late Green
    Leeks.--Monstrous Carenton
    Mangels.--Mammoth Long Red
    Kale.--Simi Dwarf Moss Curled
    Onions.--Danvers Globe
    Peppers.--Sweet Mountain
    Parsnips.--Hollow Crown
    Pumpkin.--King of the Mammoth, Mammoth Tours, Small
      Sugar
    Parsley.--Hamburg Turnip Rooted, Champion Moss Curled
    Salsify.--French
    Squash.--Summer Crookneck, White Bush, Yellow Bush,
      Improved Hubbard American Turban, Louisiana, Mammoth
      Golden Crookneck, Ice Cream Pattipan
    Turnips.--Purple Top Strap Leaf, Purple Top White Globe,
      Golden Ball, Snowball, Cow Horn, White Top Strap Leaf
    Water Melons.--Red Seeded Citron
Earl Daniels, Bath. Silver medal
    Potatoes.--Great Divide, White Giant, White Flower, Blue
      Bell, Victor, Early Minister, Golden Bell, Excelsior
C. W. Dearlove, Prattsburg. Silver medal
    Potatoes.--Evert's Early, Rupert's Perfection, Free Silver,
      Rupert's Early, Stray Beauty, Rural New Yorker No. 2,
      Farmer's Beauty, Maine Rose, Adirondack, Sarvia Red, New
      Queen, Pride of the West, Cayuga Chief, Mammoth Pearl,
      Early Thoroughbred, Prize Taker, White Beauty, Mills' New
      Astonisher, Early Minister, Michigan Russet, Rose Early, Early
      Ohio, Earth Northern, English Russet, White Peachblow, Late
      Rose, Isle of Jersey, Pride of Jersey, Money Maker, Snow
      Drop, Late Prindaes
John DeGraw, Middletown. Bronze medal
    Potatoes.--Early Northern, Blue Victor
G. M. Durland, Florida. Bronze medal
    Potatoes.--Early Sunrise
Dutchess County. Silver medal
    Potatoes.
A. Empie, Carlisle. Bronze medal
    Potatoes.--Early White Michigan, Freeman
Leonard Fenton, Standards. Bronze medal
    Potatoes.--Early Giant
Charles W. Ford & Co., Fishers. Silver medal
    Potatoes.--Empire State, Queen
E. C. Foster, Standards. Bronze medal
    Potatoes.--Blue Victor
Geneva Experiment Station, Geneva. Silver medal
    Tomatoes.--Ponderosa, Earliana, Success, Trophy, Royal
      Red, Atlantic Prize, Golden Queen, Lester's Prolific, Beauty,
      Buckeye, Freedom, New Imperial
G. Gessell, South Lirna. Silver medal
    Celery
Burt Giddings, Fulton. Bronze medal
    Onions
Glendale Stock Farm, Glens Falls. Grand prize
    Squash.--Golden Bronze, Hubbard, Marblehead, Turban,
      Boston Marrow, Brazilian Sugar, Pineapple, Mammoth Whale,
      Canada Crookneck, Early Golden Bush, Silver Bush, Yellow
      Bush Scallop, Fordhook, Early White Scallop Bush, Red
      Hubbard, Summer Crookneck, Giant Summer Crookneck, Warty
      Hubbard, Red Hubbard, Mammoth, Chilian, Essex Hybrid,
      Ford Hook, Cocoanut, White Bush Scallop, New Mammoth
      White Bush, English Vegetable Marrow, Mammoth Yellow
      Bush, Golden Custard, White Summer Crookneck, White Pineapple,
      Early White Bush, Long White Marrow, Des Wing,
      Pike's Peak, White Chestnut, Delicate, Bronze, Golden Marrow,
      Giant Crookneck, Giant Straightneck, Striped Bush
    Beets.--Long Red, Red Globe, Yellow Globe, Table Beet
      Flat, Rose Half Sugar, Red Intermediate, Sugar, Long Yellow,
      Giant Yellow Intermediate, Half Long Turnip
    Mangels.--Wurzel Golden Tankard, Wurzel Mammoth Long
      Red, Wurzel Yellow Globe
    Cucumbers.--Short Green, Yellow Short, White Long, Improved
      Long Green
    Leek.--Musselburgh, Large Row
    Kohl Rabi.--Early Purple Vienna
    Parsnips.--Long White
    Carrots.--Long White, Half Short Ox Heart, Long Orange,
      Short White
    Turnips.--Yellow Rutabaga, Red Top, Globe Shaped, White
      Strap-Leafed Flat
    Pumpkins.--Cheese, Connecticut Field, Red Etampe, Cushaw,
      Green Mountain, Early Sugar, Livingston Pie, Quaker
      Pie, Brazilian Sugar, Negro, Tennessee Sweet Potato, Golden
      Oblong, Genuine Mammoth, Winter Luxury, King of Mammoth,
      Sandwich Island, Salzer's Mammoth, Jonathan, Calhoun,
      Tours, Mammoth Globe, Sweet Pie, Golden Oblong, Japan
      Crookneck
    Tomatoes.--Acme, Canada, Cardinal, Dwarf Champion,
      Early Conquerer, Essex Hybrid, General Grant, Jumbo, Livingston's
      Beauty, Livingston's Favorite, Livingston's Perfection,
      Mikado, New Queen, Optmus, Paragon, Pear-Shaped
      Red, Pear-Shaped Yellow, Crimson Cushion, Yellow Cherry,
      Red Cherry, Stone Cherry, Combination, Henderson's Ponderosa,
      Mammoth Prize, Honor Bright, Burpee's Noble, Long
      Keeper, Sutton's Best of All, Ford Hook First, Imperial,
      Climax, Queen Table, Autocrat, Beauty, Golden Queen, White
      Excelsior, Lemon Bush, Terra Cotta Lorillard, Yellow Peach,
      Red Peach, Red Currant, Matchless, Yellow Plum, Red Pear,
      Yellow Pear, Trophy, Volunteer
    Water Melons.--Black Spanish, Boss, Cuban Queen, Green
      and Gold, Kolb's Gem, Mammoth Iron Clad, Mountain Sweet,
      Orange, Peerless Ice Cream, Cole, The Jones, Sweetheart, Black
      Diamond, Florida's Favorite, Dixie, Seminole, Pride of Georgia,
      Black Bolder, Duke Jones, Scarly Bark, Wonderful Sugar,
      Phinney's Early
    Peppers.--Celestial Cherry, County Fair, Chinese, Long Cayenne,
      Long Red, Long Yellow, Ruby King, Sweet Mountain,
      Black Unbian, Red Chili, Red Etruce, Elephant, Gold Upright,
      Kaliscope, Red Cluster, Orange Rinkle, Bull Nose, Spanish
      Montrous, Ox Heart, Red Cherry, Sweet Spanish, Yellow Chili
    Cauliflower.
    Cabbage.--Early York, Winnestadt, Summer, Jersey Wakefield,
      Early Flat Dutch, Fowler's Short Stem, All Seasons, Henderson's
      Succession, Stone Mason, Autumn King, Tildegrant,
      Late Flat Dutch, Drumhead, Marblehead Mammoth, Nettie
      Savoy, Drumhead Savoy, Early Red Erfust, Dwarf Flat Dutch,
      Henderson's Early Spring, Selected All Seasons, Charlton
      Wakefield, Thorburn's Collosal, Short Stem, Large Red Drumhead,
      Red Polish Short Stem
    Cucumbers.--Early Russian, Early Cluster, Early Green Prolific,
      Early Frame, Early White Spine, Livingston's Evergreen,
      Nichols' Medium, Long Green, Japanese Climbing, Cool and
      Crisp, White Wonder, Snake, White Pearl, Paris Pickling,
      Short Green Gherkins, West India Gherkins, Long Green Turkey,
      White Spine Arlington
    Brussells Sprouts.--Improved Half Dwarf, Improved Dwarf
      German, Improved Long Island, Improved Perfection
    Egg Plant.--Improved New York, Early Dwarf Purple,
      Long Purple, Round French, Black Pekin, Mammoth Pearl,
      Scarlet Chinese, Round White, Long White, Striped White,
      Black Snake
    Leeks.--Large Flag Winter, Large Rouen Winter, Large
      Musselberg, London Summer
    Parsnips.--Guerney, Long Smooth, Hollow Crown, Delmonico,
      Abbot, Maltese, Student
    Salsify.--Long White French, Sandwich Islands, Thick
      Rooted
    Brussells Sprouts.--Seven Dwarf, Tall, Green, Dwarf Prolific,
      Lady Finger, White Velvet, Perkins Mammoth, Sugar
      Trough, Dipper, Nest Egg, Spocen
    Sage
    Thyme
    Summer Savory
    Dill
    Winter Savory
    Martynia
    Chicory
    Carrots.--Ox Heart, St. Valery, Early Scarlet Horn, Half
      Long Scarlet, Danvers Half Long; Long Yellow Stump Root,
      Long Orange, Short White Vosges, White Belgian, Yellow
      Belgian, Danvers, Henderson's New York, Early Forcing
    Onions.--Yellow Globe Danvers, Yellow Strasburg, Early
      Red, Red Wethersfield, Southport White Globe, Southport Red
      Globe, Southport Yellow Globe, Early Cracker, Silver Skin,
      Prize Taker, White Victoria Red, Early Barletta, Australian
      Brown, White Portugal, Silver Ball, Large Red Globe, Improved
      Michigan, Large White Globe, Giant Roco, Burpee's,
      Gibralter, Queen, Ohio Yellow Globe
    Beets.--Columbia, Dark Stinson, Early Blood Turnip, Egyptian,
      Improved Arlington, Dewing's Improved Blood, Half
      Long Blood, Lentz, Crimson Globe, Eclipse, Crosby's Egyptian,
      Edmunds' Early Blood, Long Smith Blood Red, Bastian Half
      Long Blood, Early Yellow Long, Early Bassano, Arlington's
      Favorite, Electric, Detroit Dark Red, Jumbo, White Sugar
      Rose Top, Lane's Improved, Vilmooric Improved, White Sugar
      Green Top, Long Red Mangel Wurzel, Long Yellow Mangel
      Wurzel, Giant Yellow Mangel Wurzel, Golden Tankard Wurzel,
      Red Globe Wurzel, Yellow Globe Wurzel, Yellow Ovoid Wurzel,
      Half Long Red Wurzel, Golden Flesh Globe Wurzel
    Turnips.--Rutabaga, Golden Ball, Cow Horn, White Egg,
      Yellow Stone, Yellow Globe, Red Top Strap Leaf
    Celeric
    Earth Almonds
    String Beans
    Potatoes.--Dewey, Early Sunrise, Grate, Freeman, Carmen
      No. 1, Telephone, Early Rose, Delaware, White Mountain,
      Stray Beauty, Snow Flake, Irish Queen, White Star, Burbank,
      American Giant, White Elephant, Peerless, Blue Victor, Maine
      Rose, Monroe Seedling, Sir Walter Raleigh, White Hebron,
      Great Dixie, American Wonder, Lightning Express, Bovee,
      Dexter, Clark No. 1, Pat's First Choice, Carmen No. 3, Early
      Ohio, State of Maine, Early Vermont, Uncle Sam, Money
      Maker, Late Rose, Empire State, Rose of Erin, Victor Rose,
      Everett, Early Six Weeks, Howell, Free Silver, Sunrise, Red
      Wonder, Early Market, Early Strawberry, Eureka, New Ideal,
      Thorburn's Late Puritan, Hampton Beauty, Maule's Early
      Thoroughbred, Glendale Seedling, White Lily, Early Chicago
      Market, Gem of Bristol, Pan American, Early Ball, Early Harvest,
      Hebron Beauty, Early Ohio, Jr., Early Northern, Kospangue,
      Green Mountain, Great Divide, New Queen, St. Joseph,
      Signal, Chinese Yams, Rural New Yorker, White Rose, Jersey
      Red Sweet, Yellow Jersey, Lady Finger, Early Russett, Blue
      Mercury, Early York, Bliss Triumph, Early Puritan
    Lettuce.--Tennis Ball, Self Folding, Golden Queen, Big
      Boston, Black-Seed Simpson, New York, Boston, Curled, Iceberg,
      Silver Ball, Hanson, White Heart, Paris White Coe
    Endive.--Green Curled, Moss Curled, White Curled, Broad
      Leafed
Bert Groummore, Minetto. Bronze medal
    Potatoes.--Carmen No. 2
Herkimer County. Silver medal
    Potatoes
George K. Higbie & Co., Rochester. Gold medal
    Potatoes
C.N. Holley, Glens Falls. Silver medal
    Potatoes.--Early Thorburn, Early Hebron, Bovee, Rural
      New Yorker No. 2, Early Norther, Carmen No. 1, Cream
      Howell, Uncle Sam, Krine's Lightning, The Queen, Early
      Fortune, Sweet Home, Pearl of Savory, Yellow Elephant,
      White Elephant, Chicago Market, Green Mountain, Early
      Whiton, Early Roberts, Dakota Red, Great American, Dewey's
      Early, Potentate, Depew, Downing, Early Market, Rural New
      Yorker No. 2, Pat's Choice, Early Norther, Clark's No. I, Blue
      Centennial, Early Seedling, Burpee's Extra Early, Mammoth
      Pearl, Early Sunrise, Irish Cobler, Early Six Weeks, Early
      Ohio, Early Rochester, Henderson's Bovee
J. C. Howard, Irondequoit
    Squash.--Summer Crookneck
    Citron
W.W. Hull, Middletown. Bronze medal
    Potatoes.--Seedless, Queen of the Highway
Jefferson County. Silver medal
    Potatoes
Daniel Johnson, Lisle. Silver medal
    Potatoes.--Carmen No. I, Bliss Triumph, Rural New Yorker No. 2,
      Early Puritan, State of Maine, Bovee, Queen, Quick Crop
S. L. Johnson, Lisle. Silver medal
    Potatoes.--Sir Walter Raleigh, Rural New Yorker No. 2, Early
      Fortune, Early Puritan, Early Maine, Admiral Dewey, Lee's
      Favorite, Quick Crop, Uncle Sam, Early York, Banner, Green
      Mountain, White Giant, King of Michigan
M. L. Klock, Bath. Gold medal
    Potatoes.--Celtic Beauty, Red Star, Ontario, Great Dundee,
      Mills' New Astonisher, Carmen No. 3, New Ideal, Rupert's
      Perfection, German Queen, Snow Flake, White Gilial, White
      Mountain, New Queen, Mohawk Valley, Twilight, White Peachblow,
      Cayuga Chief, Bliss Triumph, Early Hebron, Early Six Weeks,
      Burpee's Early, Hammond's Up-to-Date, Golden Bell, Early
      Chicago Market, Early Ohio, White Hebron, Rose White,
      White Wax, Maine Rose, Farmer's Daughter, Isle of Jersey,
      Housewife Favorite, Queen of the Valley, Early Crusader, Great
      Steuben
W. S. Kisker, Summit
    Potatoes.--Vick's Champion, Sir Walter Raleigh No. 1
Mrs. C. A. Knapp, Goshen
    Potatoes.--Rural New Yorker
Lewis County. Silver medal
    Potatoes
O. M. Lincoln, Newark. Gold medal
    Potatoes.--Bliss Triumph, Irish Cobler, Rural New Yorker, Bill Nye,
      Early Potentate, Strange Beauty, Blue Victor, Early Norther, White
      Giant, Early Ohio, Early Fortune, Early Sunrise, World's Fair
      Premium, Negro, June Eating, Quick Crop, White Russet, White
      Beauty, Sir Walter Raleigh, Bovee, Star, Early Puritan, Early
      Harvest, Early Albino, Maggie Murphy, Everetts, Dandy, Albino,
      Carmen No. 1 & 2, World's Fair, Great Divide, Early Market, Early
      Maine, Freeman, American Wonder, Pingree, Empire State,
      Rochester Rose, State of Maine, Beauty of Hebron, Monroe Seedling,
      Thorburn, New Queen
P. R. Loder, Bluff Point. Silver medal
    Potatoes.--Abundance, Burpee's Extra Early, Early White
      Sunrise, Polaris Early, Gold Coin, Rural New Yorker, Early
      Rose, Late Rose, Late White, Cyclone, White Napoleon, Potentate,
      Early Puritan
Prescott E. Maine, Canastota. Silver medal
    Mangel.--Long Red, Golden Tankard
    Beets.--Sugar
    Squash.--Red Hubbard, Yellow Bush Scallop, Winter Crookneck,
    Mammoth Chilian
    Pumpkin.--Early Sugar, Negro
    Cucumber.--Long White
W. H. Manning, Elm Valley. Bronze medal
    Potatoes.--Tuscarora, Mortgage Lifter
G. W. Manning, Elm Valley
    Potatoes.--Mortgage Lifter
Asa Mapes, Howells. Bronze medal
    Potatoes.--Green Mountain
E. N. Marsh, Fredonia. Gold medal
    Potatoes.--Uncle Sam, Lincoln, White Rose, Mortgage
      Lifter, Ohio Junior, Early Sunrise, Sir Walter Raleigh, Early
      Burpee, Eureka, May Queen, Isle of Wight, Early Bovee, Great
      Divide, Acme, Early King, Astonisher, Early Minnesota, Polaris,
      Rochester Rose, Six Weeks, Ohio, Million Dollar Mark
      Hanna, Rural New Yorker, Mills' Prize, Express, Honeoye
      Rose, Salzer's Earliest, Early Rochester
    Onions
    Squash
    Gourd
    Kohl Rabi
C. H. Mason, Cortland. Bronze medal
    Potatoes.--Clark's Seedling, Pride of Castle Dorn
A. A. Mitchell, Palmyra. Silver medal
    Potatoes.--White Peachblow, Empire State, American Wonder,
      New Queen, World's Fair, Stray Beauty, Bliss Triumph,
      White Star, Sir Walter Raleigh, Early Ohio, Rupert's Perfection,
      White Russet, Rural New Yorker, Early Northern, Early
      Bovee, Early Hebron, Negro, Carmen Nos. 1, 2, 3, Irish
      Cobler, Wilson's First Choice, Honeove Rose, White Giant,
      Bill Nye, Rural New Yorker No. 2, State of Maine, Monroe
      Seedling, Burpee's Extra Early, Blue Victor, Dunkirk Seedling,
      Early Sunrise, Beauty of Hebron, Rochester Rose, Early
      Potentate, Pink Eye, Queen of the Valley, Early Rose
Monroe County. Silver medal
    Potatoes
Montgomery County. Silver medal
    Potatoes
A. J. Moore, Beaver Dam. Silver medal
    Potatoes.--American Wonder, Epitomes, Pride of Jersey,
      Mohawk Valley, Pan American, Rural New Yorker No. a, Mr.
      Dooley, Adirondack, Bovee, White Hebron, Early Puritan,
      Clark's Nonesuch, Prize Taker, Michigan Russet, Early Sunrise
James D. McCann, Elmira. Bronze medal
    Potatoes.--American Giants
W. A. McCoduck, Sandy Hill. Silver medal
    Onions
New York State Exhibit of Vegetables. Grand prize
Onondaga County. Silver medal
    Potatoes
Ontario County. Silver medal
    Potatoes
Orange County. Silver medal
    Onions
Otsego County. Silver medal
    Potatoes
Fred B. Paine, South Granby. Bronze medal
    Potatoes.--Vermont Gold Coin, Carmen No. 3, Sir Walter
      Raleigh, Stray Beauty, Green Mountain, Rural New Yorker
      No. 2
A. J. Reed, Bath
    Beets
R. F. Russell, Westtown.
    Potatoes.--Queen of the Valley
M. J. Sahler, Pattaukunk
    Potatoes.--Ouick Crop, Early Dew Drop
Saratoga County. Bronze medal
    Potatoes
W. H. Saunders, South Lima. Silver medal
    Celery
Schenectady County. Silver medal
    Potatoes
Schoharie County. Silver medal
    Potatoes
Schuyler County. Silver medal
    Potatoes
George Scott, Bath. Bronze medal
    Potatoes.--Rose White, Early Doe, Early Hero, Early Wheeler
Chas. J. Settle, Cobleskill. Bronze medal
    Potatoes.--Burbank, Sir Walter Raleigh, Money Makers,
      Carmen No. 1
Frank Shear, Standards
    Potatoes.--Endurance
W. C. Skiff, Davenport Center. Silver medal
    Potatoes.--Early Ohio, White Star, Early Puritan, Stray
      Beauty, Blue Victor, June Eating, Rock Rose, Early Sunrise,
      Everett, Calvert, White Peachblow, Carmen No. 1, White
      Beauty, Dandy, Early Harvest, Empire State, Early Market,
      New Queen, Bovee, Pingree, Bliss Triumph, Quick Crop, Sir
      Walter Raleigh, Beauty of Hebron, American Wonder, White
      Giant, Great Divide, Maggie Murphy
Chas. Slocum, Freetown Corners. Bronze medal
    Potatoes.--Polarus
C. C. Smith, Bath
    Carrots
    Mangels
Jay W. Smith, Fulton. Bronze medal
    Potatoes.--Vermont Gold Coin, Eureka, Potentate, Burpee's
      Extra Early, Early Northern, Irish Cobler
Steuben County. Silver medal
    Potatoes
Steuben Nature Study Workers, Bath
    Potatoes.--Cambridge Russet, Clark's No. 1, Allen's No. 1,
      Beauty of Hebron, King of the Roses, Clark's Nonesuch,
      Celtic Beauty, Salzer's Peachblow, Maggie Murphy, Blue Victor,
      Clark's Early, Abundance, Earlv Sunrise, Cream of the
      Field, American Beauty, Blue Bell, Rose No. 9, Cuban Giant,
      White Peachblow, Giant White, Pan American, World's Fair,
      Peachblow, Carmen No. 3, Hammond's Up-to-Date, Commercial,
      Wilson's First Choice, American Beauty Early, Cavuga
      Chief, White Flower, Vick's Favorite, Charles Downing, Rose
      Invincible, American Wonder White Star, Vick's Extra
      Early, Free Silver, Burpee's Empire State, John Bull, Samson's
      Best, Early Hebron, The Epitomist, Blue Bell, Vick's
      Harvest, Pride of the West, Uncle Sam, Twilight, Great Divide,
      Troy Seedling, Vick's Early Perfection, Twentieth Century,
      Snow Drop, Snow Flake, Rural New Yorker No. 2,
      St. Patrick, Salzer's Earliest, Rupert's Perfection, Adirondack,
      Rural New Yorker No. 1, Prize Taker, Early Wheeler, Washington,
      Klondike, Sir Walter Raleigh, Rose Clay, Bliss Triumph,
      The Tramp, Ted Roosevelt, Great Steuben, Trumbull,
      Hammond's New Wonder, Rusty Coat, Oom Paul, Pride of
      America, Purple Pole, Rupert's Early, Blue Mercer, Early
      Six Weeks, Early Rose Improved, German Queen, Jersey Red,
      American Beauty Late, Jersey Peachblow, Early Michigan,
      Early Cuban Giant, Cobler, Beauty of Rochester, Rose Yo. 9;
      Bovee Earlv, Mammoth Pearl, White Mountain, Monroe Seedling,
      Rose Beauty, Early Harvest, Early Maine, Mills New
      Astonisher, Early Minister, Maine Hebron, White Banner,
      Golden Bell, Green Mountain, Mortgage Lifter, Mohawk Valley,
      German Otteen, Early Pingree, State of Maine, White
      Mammoth, Clark's Early, Columbia, Carmen No. 1, Early
      Gem, Dakota Red, Irish Daisy, Irish Russet, Lee's Favorite,
      Late Puritan, Early Norther, Stray Beauty, Rose Honeoye,
      Radical Seedling, Early Hero, Earlv Snow Ball, White Wax,
      Enormous, Rural Blush, Dewey, Housewife's Favorite, No
      Equal, Real Star, Mills' Prize, Money Maker, Early Pride,
      Rupert's Early, Early Crusader, Early Ohio, Early Chicago
      Market, Early Puritan, English Russet, Early Thoroughbred,
      Golden Nugget, Early Doe, Hammond's Pride of Briton, Early
      Vermont, Michigan Russet, New Jersey, Long Keeper, Livingston's
      Banner, Queen of the Valley, Early Gem, Summerset,
      Himalaya, New Queen, Isle of Jersev, Pride of Jersey, Early
      Freeman, Early Beauty, White Gilial, Early Fortune
    Onions.--White Flat, Yellow Flat, Red Flat, White Round,
      Round Red
    Turnips.--Purple Top Strap Leaf, Purple Top Rutabaga,
      White Strap Leaf
    Squash.--Hubbard, White Bush Scallop, Summer Crookneck
    Pumpkin.--Red Field, Negro
    Cabbage.--Flat Dutch, Drumhead
    Cucumbers.--Short Green
    Radish.--White Winter
    Parsnips.--Long
    Beets.--Table Round, Table Long, Yellow Mangels
    Carrots.--Half Long Orange, Long Orange
St. Lawrence County. Silver medal
    Potatoes
Sunnyside Farm, Starkey. Gold medal
    Onions.--Philadelphia Silver Skin, Giant Rocco, Large Yellow
      Globe, Large White Globe, Large Red Globe, Prize Taker,
      Austrian Brown, Red Weathersfield, White Pearl
    Beets.--Lang's Improved Imperial Sugar, Golden Tankard,
      Detroit Dark Red, Burpee's Improved Blood, Brundage Red
      Sugar, Brundage Yellow Sugar, Orange Globe, Improved
      Wanglebee, Crimson Globe
    Carrots.--Danver's Half Long, White Belgium, Ox Heart
    Radish.--Round Black Spanish Winter
    Gourds.--Common, Ornamental Pomegranate
    Turnips.--White Neckless, Purple Top Strap Leaf, Burpee's
      Breadstone
    Squash.--Large Crookneck, Mammoth White Bush Scallop
    Parsnips.--Hollow Crown
    Salsify.--Mammoth Sandwich Island
    Musk Melons.--Banana
    Cucumbers.--White Wonder, Ford Hook Pickling, Ivory
      Monarch, Cool and Crisp, Early Russian, Lemon, Wild, West
      Indies
    Tomatoes.--Enornous Vine Peaches, Golden Queen,
      Matchless, Peach, Yellow Pear, Yellow and Red Cherry
    Potatoes.--Early Ohio, Twilight, Irish Queen, Tuscarora,
      Crown Jewel, State of Maine, Livingston, Belle, White Giant,
      Early Fortune, Vermont Gold Coin, Jersey Peachblow, Mr.
      Dooley, Monroe Prize, Maine Pearl, Centennial, New Queen,
      White Chili, Garlick, Late Star, Hundred Fold, King's Excelsior,
      Carmen No. 3, St. Patrick, Pride of the East, Salzer's
      Beauty, White Peachblow, Seneca Beauty, Baltimore, Old
      Hemlock, Pan American, Allen's No. 1, Lake Erie, Republican,
      Golden Bell, Trumbull, White Michigan, Mullolly, Burpee's
      Extra Early, Rutland Rose, Lady Finger, Early Triumph, Irish
      Cups, Free Silver, Woodhull Seedling, Lincoln, Wall's Maggie
      Murphy, Harvest Queen, Dermore, Table King, Eureka,
      Commercial, Durand Seedling, Northern Spy, Jumbo Charley,
      Queen Victoria, Irish Daisy, Pure Gold, Webster Rose, Charles
      Oak, Summerset, June Eating, Ford's Late White, Empire
      State, Signal, Washington, Green Mountain, Vick's Armstrong,
      Early Freeman, Valley Queen, Red Star, Twentieth
      Century, New Wonder, Snow Flake, Garfield, Isle of Jersey,
      California, Million Dollar, Crandall, Limbo, White Elephant,
      Bermuda, Overton No. g, Rural New Yorker No. 2, Derlove
      No. 7, Farmer's Beauty, Allis' Seedling, Vick's Late White,
      Peachblow Seedling, Belle of Nelson, New Jersey, Irish Cobler,
      Vick's Baker, White Star, Stray Beauty, White Hebron, Cuban
      Orange, Pullman Seedling, Dakota Red, American Beauty,
      Red Chili, Drake's Bermuda, Home Comfort, World's Fair,
      Strong Pride, Early Wonder, Rhode Island Peachblow, June
      Holton, Roscow, Narragansett Red, Beaulah's North Star,
      Fultz. Seedling, Irish Russet, Oepheart, Cow Horn, Monever
      Pride, Irish Gray, Burpee's Early, Enormous, Red Astrican,
      Prolific, Jr., White Whipper, Salina Red, Old Peachblow
Alfred Sweet, Glens Falls. Silver medal
    Potatoes.--North Star, Sir Walter Raleigh, Green Mountain,
      Early Ruby, Potentate, Early Rose, Aristoke Rose, Early Puritan,
      Weiss Rose, Sir Walter Raleigh, Early Ohio, Livingston
      Banner, Poodle, Rose of Erin, Early Vermont, Irish Cobler,
      Mortgage Lifter, Early York, Cuba Orange, American Giant,
      Burbank, Snow Flake, White Mountain, Early Rose, Carmen
      No. 1, Early Sunrise, Delaware, Yellow Jersey, Jersey Red,
      Irish Queen, Stray Beauty, White Elephant, Telephone, Freeman,
      Dewey, Money Maker, White Star
Morrison Taylor, Florida. Bronze medal
    Potatoes.--Green Mountain
J. M. Thorburn & Co., New York City. Grand prize
    Potatoes--Hewe's Early, Early Whiton, Green Mountain,
      Great American, White Elephant, Yellow, Dakota Red, Early
      Robert, Pearl of Savoy, Sweet Home, Chicago Market, Early
      Fortune, Carmen No. 1, Early Norther, Early Queen, The
      Queen, Rural New Yorker No. 2, Bovee, Krine's Lightning,
      Uncle Sam, Early Hebron, Crown Jewel, Early Thorburn,
      Early Rose, Carmen No. 3, Bliss Triumph, Gold Coin
    Sweet Corn.--Country Gentleman, Black Mexican, Striped
      Evergreen, White Evergreen, Stowell's Evergreen
    Sweet Potatoes.--Harrison's Seedling, Jersey Red, Pierson's
      Yellow Jersey, Vineland Bush
    Carrots.--Early Scarlet Horn, Guerandes, Half Long
      Pointed, Half Long Stump Rooted, Nautes, Chautenay, Bellot,
      Early Forcing, Early Round Parisian, White Vosges, St. Valery,
      Short White, Long White, Luc, Half Long Danvers, Long
      Orange
    Beets.--Giant Yellow Intermediate Mangel, Red Globe
      Tankard Mangel, Golden Tankard Mangel, Yellow Tankard
      Mangel, Queen of Denmark Mangel, Long Yellow Mangel,
      Mammoth Long Red Mangel, Green Top Mangel; Rose Top
      Mangel, Yellow Ovoid Mangel, Yellow Globe Mangel, Electric,
      Crimson Globe, Dewing Early, Detroit, Early Blood Turnip,
      Crosby's Egyptian, Half Long Blood, Bassano, Bastian, Long
      Smooth Blood
    Squash.--Early Golden Scallop Bush, Mammoth Chilian,
      Eauphine, Hubbard, Golden Warted, Warren, Boston Marrow,
      Bay State, Marrow, Turban, Mammoth Whale, Brazilian,
      Vegetable, Cocozell Bush, Canada Crookneck, Winter, White
      Custard, Yellow Custard, Cocoanut, Green Streaked Bush,
      Long Island White Bush, Early White Scallop, Giant Summer
      Crookneck, Giant Summer Straightneck, Delicate, Golden
      Hubbard, Ford Hook, Vegetable Marrow, Yellow Oblong,
      Pineapple
    Onions.--Prize Taker, Golden Globe, Small Yellow Globe,
      Red Gargeniis, Roquette
    Parsley.--Extra Curled, Moss, Fern Leaf, Beauty of the Pasture,
      Hamburg
    Pumpkin.--Cheese, Connecticut Field, Red Estanples,
      Negro, Cushaw, Jonathan, Calhoun, Small Sugar
    Peppers.--Long Red Cayenne, Squash, Sweet Golden, Red
      Harold, Golden Queen, Ruby King, Sweet Mountain, Chinese
      Giant, Sweet Italian, Sweet Spanish, Neapolitan, Red Pointed
      Celebrese, Long Bell, Procople Giant, Ox Heart, Elephant's
      Trunk, Yellow Cherry, Celestial, Red Chili, Red Cherry, Red
      Chester, Long Black Mexican, Matchless, Honor Bright
    Kohl Rabi.--Purple Vienna, White Vienna
    Cauliflower
    Egg Plant.-New York Improved, Black Snake, Long
      Purple, Long White, Round White, Mammoth Pearl, Scarlet
      Chinese
    Gourd.--Striped Pear, Orange, Egg, Sugar Trough, Dipper,
      Hercules Club
    Radishes.--Round Black Spanish, Half Long Black Spanish,
      Long Black Spanish, White Winter Spanish, Celestial,
      White Mammoth, Scarlet Chinese
    Chicory
    Salsify
    Burnet
    Okra.--Long Green, White Velvet Pod, Dwarf Green Improved,
      Green Prolific
    Martynia
Tioga County. Silver medal,
    Potatoes
Tompkins County. Grand prize
    Vegetables
Walter Van Loon, Bath
    Beets
W. P. Vanscoter, Bath
    Onions
    Parsnips
    Salsify
H. S. Vermilyea, Chelsea. Silver medal
    Potatoes.--Thorburn, Money Maker, Sir Walter Raleigh,
      New Queen, Carmen No. I, Acme, Bovee, Irish Cobler, Carmen
      No. 3, White Star
Warren County. Grand prize
    Vegetables
Washington County. Silver medal
    Potatoes
Wayne County. Silver medal
    Potatoes
Westchester County. Silver medal
    Potatoes
Charles Wheelhouse, Fulton. Bronze medal
    Beets.--Detroit Red Blood
    Onions.--Red Wethersfield, Yellow Danvers
D. M. White, Bath
    Carrots
    Mangels
------ Wrenwick, Wellsville
    Potatoes.--Elephant
A. Young, Bath
    Onions



GROUPS EIGHTY-FIVE, NINETY-ONE AND NINETY-TWO

_Animal Food Products, Waters, Wines, etc._

John Abd-et-nour, New York city. Silver medal
    Silk worms and cocoons
J. A. Anderson, Mooers Forks. Silver medal
    Butter
Barson & Co., A. S., 40 West street, New York city. Gold medal
    Cigarettes
J. W. Beardsley's Sons, New York city. Gold medal
    Bacon, dried and smoked beef, shredded codfish and star boneless
      herring put up in glass and tin
Sarah Drowne Belcher, M. D., New York city. Bronze medal
    Book on clean milk
Borden's Condensed Milk, New York city. Gold medal
    Condensed milk
John Brand & Co., Packers, Elmira. Gold medal
    Leaf tobacco
Breesport Water Co., Elmira. Silver medal
    Carbonated table water
Brotherhood Wine Co., New York city. Grand prize
    Wines and champagnes
A. C. Brown, Cincinnatus. Silver medal
    Butter
Natural Mineral Water Co., Saratoga Springs. Gold medal
    Carbonated table water
Congress Spring Co., Saratoga Springs. Gold medal
    Carbonated table water
Curtice Brothers. Rochester. Gold medal
    Canned fruits, vegetables, meats and catsups in glass and tin
Dedrick & Son, P. K., Albany. Grand prize
    Hay presses
F. De Garmo, Rochester. Gold medal
    Tobacco
Jonas Dillenback, Cobleskill. Silver medal
    Pressed hops
Duffy's Malt Whiskey Co., Rochester. Gold medal
    Whiskies
J. H. Durkee, Collaborator, New York State Exhibit. Gold medal
    Collectively and installation specialty
Henry Eibert, Thorn Hill. Silver medal
    Butter
Erie Preserving Co., Buffalo. Gold medal
    Canned fruit and vegetables in tin and glass
Excelsior Springs Co., Saratoga. Gold medal
    Carbonated table water
France Milling Co., Cobleskill. Gold medal
    Buckwheat flour
Germania Wine Cellars, Hammondsport. Gold medal
    Champagnes
Gleason Grape Juice Co., Fredonia. Silver medal
    Grape juice
Gordon & Dilworth, New York city. Gold medal
    Canned fruits, meats and catsups in glass and tin
Emit Greiner, 78 John street, New York city. Silver medal
    Dairy glass ware
Hammondsport Wine Co., Hammondsport. Bronze medal
    Wines and champagnes
High Rock Spring Co., Saratoga Springs. Gold medal
    Carbonated table water
Irondequoit Wine Co., Rochester. Bronze medal
    Wines and champagnes
Lincoln Spring Co., Saratoga Springs. Gold medal
    Carbonated table water
New York State. Grand prize
    Exhibit of canned goods, meats, preserves
New York State Exhibit. Gold medal
    Cheese
New York State Exhibit. Gold medal
    Butter
Paterson's Mineral Springs, Saratoga Springs. Gold medal
    Carbonated table water
Quevic Spring Co., Saratoga Springs. Gold medal
    Carbonated table water
------ Randall. Silver medal
    Grape juice
H. Brown Richardson, Lowville. Gold medal
    Maple sugar and syrup
Ripin Wine Co., New York city. Silver medal
    Champagne
T. F. Rutherford, Madrid. Silver medal
    Butter
Saratoga Seltzer Spring Co., Saratoga Springs. Gold medal
    Carbonated table water
Saratoga Vichy Water Co., Saratoga Springs. Gold medal
    Carbonated table water
Stachalberg & Co., A. M., New York city. Gold medal
    Cigars
Star Spring Co., Saratoga Springs. Gold medal
    Carbonated table water
The Genesee Pure Food Co., Le Roy. Gold medal
    Jello
The Natural Mineral Water Co., Saratoga Springs. Gold medal
    Carbonated table water
United Cigar Manufacturing Co., New York city. Grand prize
    Cigars
Urbana Wine Co., Urbana. Gold medal
    Wines and champagnes
S. E. Van Horn, Durham. Silver medal
    Butter
C. A. Weatherly & Co., Milford. Bronze medal
    Cheese
J. O. Weeks, New York city. Silver medal
    Ice cream powder
Welch Grape Juice Co., Westfield. Silver medal
    Grape juice
White Top Champagne Co., Hammondsport. Gold medal
    Champagne
Worcester Salt Co., New York city. Gold medal
    Table and dairy salt

_The following is a catalogue of exhibitors in the Department of Live
Stock with the awards, if any, received by each_

GROUP NINETY-EIGHT

_Cattle_

AYRSHIRES--SEVEN HERDS COMPETING

W. P. Schenck, Avon
    Bull, 3 years old or over. Fifth premium, $30.
    Bull, 1 vear and under 2 years. First premium, $50.
    Cow, 3 years old or over. Fifth premium, $30.
    Heifer, 2 years and under 4. Third and fourth premiums,
      $90.
    Heifer, 1 year and under 2. Third premium, $30.
    Get of one sire. Second premium, $65.
    Produce of one cow. Second and fifth premiums, $105.
    Aged herd. Fourth premium, $65.
    Young herd. Third premium, $55.
    Aged herd, bred by exhibitor. Second premium, $100.
    Young herd, bred by exhibitor. Third premium, $55.

BROWN SWISS--SEVEN HERDS COMPETING

F. R. Hazzard, Syracuse
    Bull, 3 years old or over. First and fifth premiums, $70.
    Bull, 2 years and under 3. First premium, $50.
    Bull, 18 months and under 2 years. Second and fifth
      premiums, $60.
    Bull, 12 months and under I8. First and third premiums, $60.
    Bull under 6 months. Second and fourth premiums, $50.
    Cow, 3 years old or over. First and third premiums, $80.
    Heifer, 2 years old and under 3. Second premium, $40.
    Heifer, 18 months and under 24. First and third premiums, $80.
    Heifer, 12 months and under 18. Third premium, $25.
    Heifer, 6 months and under 12. Second and fifth premiums, $45.
    Heifer, under 6 months. Third and fifth premiums, $40.
    Get of one sire. First premium, $50.
    Produce of one cow. Second and third premiums, $75.
    Aged herd. First premium, $75.
    Young herd. Third premium, $35.
    Herd bred by exhibitor. Third premium.
    Champion bull, 2 years old or over. $80.
    Champion cow, 2 years old or over. $80.
    Grand champion bull. $125.
    Grand champion cow. $125.
McLaury Bros. & Freemeyer, Portlandville
    Bull, 3 years old or over. Fourth premium, $25.
    Bull, 2 years and under 3. Fifth premium, $40.
    Bull, 18 months and under 2 years. First premium, $50.
    Bull, 6 months and under 12. First premium, $35.
    Bull under 6 months. First premium, $35.
    Cow, 3 years old or over. Second and fifth premiums,
      $60.
    Heifer, 2 years old and under 3. First premium, $50.
    Heifer, 12 months and under IS. Fourth premium, $20.
    Heifer, 6 months and under 12. First premium, $35.
    Get of one sire. Second premium, $40.
    Produce of one cow. First and fourth premiums, $75.
    Aged herd. Third premium, $60.
    Young herd. First premium, $50.
    Herd bred by exhibitor. $200.
    Champion bull under 2 years old. $60.
    Champion cow under 2 years old. $60.

JERSEYS--TEN HERDS COMPETING

McLaury Bros. & Freemeyer, Portlandville
    Bull, 2 years old and under 3. Third premium, $50.
    Cow, 3 years old and over. Fifth premium, $30.
    Heifer, 2 years old and under 3. Fourth premium, $40.

KERRYS--ONE HERD COMPETING

G. M. Carnochan, New York city
    One prize for herd

SCOTCH HIGHLANDS--ONE HERD COMPETING

Warner M. Van Worden, Rye
    One prize for herd

GUERNSEYS--SEVEN HERDS COMPETING

C. C. Taylor, Lawton Station
    Bull, 3 years old and over. First premium, $75.
    Bull, 2 years old and under 3. Fifth premium, $30.
    Bull, 1 year and under 2. Second premium, $40.
    Bull under 1 year. Second premium, $40.
    Heifer, 2 and under 3 years. Fourth premium, $40.
    Heifer, 1 and under 2 years. Third premium, $30.
    Heifer under 1 year. Third and fifth premiums, $50.
    Get of one sire. Second premium, $65.
    Produce of one cow. Fifth premium, $40.
    Aged herd. Second premium, $100.
    Young herd. First premium, $75.
    Aged herd, bred by exhibitor. Second premium, $100.
    Young herd, bred by exhibitor. First premium, $100.
F. B. Buckley, Schaghticoke
    Cow, 3 years old or over. Fifth premium, $30.
    Heifer, 1 and under 2 years. Fourth and fifth premiums, $45.
    Get of one sire. Third premium, $55.
    Produce of one cow. Fourth premium, $45.
    Aged herd. Fourth premium, $65.
    Young herd. Fifth premium, $40.
    Young herd, bred by exhibitor. Fifth premium, $40.

GROUP NINETY-NINE

_Sheep_

SHROPSHIRES

SEVEN FLOCKS COMPETING--TWO FROM NEW YORK

L. D. Rumsey, Lewiston
    Ram, 2 years old or over. Fifth prize, $20.
    Ram, 12 months and under 16. Fourth prize, $30.
    Ram, 6 months and under 12. Fifth prize, $15.
    Ewe, 2 years old and over. First and fourth prizes, $80.
    Ewe, 12 months and under 18. Second prize, $45.
    Champion ewe, 1 year old or over. First prize, $80.
    Grand champion ewe. First prize, $100.
    Four animals, get of one sire. First prize, $60.
    Two animals, produce of one ewe. First prize, $40.
    Aged flock. Fourth prize, $25.
    Young flock. Second prize, $40.
H. L. Wardwell, New York city
    Ram, 12 months and under 18. Fifth prize, $20.
    Ram, 6 months and under 12. First prize, $35.
    Ram under 6 months. Second prize, $30.
    Ewe, 2 years old and over. Second prize, $45.
    Ewe, 12 months and under 18. Fourth prize, $30.
    Ewe, 6 months and under 12. Fifth prize, $15.
    Ewe under 6 months. Second and fourth prizes, $50.
    Champion ram under 1 year old. First prize, $50.
    Four animals, get of one sire. Second prize, $50.
    Two animals, produce of one ewe. Fourth prize, $20.
    Aged flock. Third prize, $30.
    Young flock. Third prize, $25.
CHEVIOTS
EIGHT FLOCKS COMPETING--ONE FROM NEW YORK
William Curry & Son, Hartwick
    Ram, 2 years old or over. Second prize, $30.
    Ram, 18 months and under 24. First prize, $35.
    Ram, 12 months and under 18. Second prize, $30.
    Ewe, 2 years old or over. First prize, $35.
    Ewe, 18 months and under 24. Third prize, $25.
    Ewe, 12 months and under 18. Fourth prize, $20.
    Ewe, 6 months and under 12. Third prize, $15.
    Champion ewe, 1 year old or over. First prize, $60.
    Grand champion ewe. First prize, $75.
    Four animals, get of one sire. Second prize, $30.
    Two animals, produce of one ewe. First prize, $25.
    Aged flock. First prize, $50.
    Young flock. Second prize, $30.
    Breeder's flock. First prize, $150.
MERINOS
THIRTEEN FLOCKS COMPETING--ONE FROM NEW YORK
D.K. Bell, Brighton
    Ram, 2 years old or over. First and second prizes, $65.
    Ram, 12 months and under 18 months. First and second prizes, $65.
    Ram under 6 months. Second and third prizes, $35.
    Ewe, 2 years old or over. First and second prizes, $65.
    Ewe, 18 months and under 24. First prize, $35.
    Ewe, 12 months and under 18. First and second prizes, $60.
    Ewe under 6 months. First and fourth prizes, $35.
    Champion ram, 1 year old or over. First prize, $60.
    Champion ewe over 1 year old. First and second prizes, $40.
    Champion ewe under 1 year old. First prize, $40.
    Grand champion ram. First prize, $75.
    Grand champion ewe. First prize. $75.
    Four animals, get of one sire. First and second prizes, $70.
    Two animals, produce of one ewe. First and second prizes,
      $45
    Aged flock. First and second prizes, $90.
    Young flock. First and second prizes, $70.
    Breeder's flock. First prize, $150.
    Exhibitor's flock. First prize, diploma.

HAMPSHIRES

FOUR FLOCKS COMPETING--ONE FROM NEW YORK

Chilmark Farm, Ossining
    Ram, 2 years old or over. Second prize, $30.
    Ram, 18 months and under 24. Fourth and fifth prizes, $35.
    Ram, 12 months and under 18. First and third prizes, $60.
    Ram, 6 months and under 12. Fourth prize, $10.
    Ewe, 2 years old or over. First and fifth prizes, $50.
    Ewe, 18 months and under 24. First and third prizes, $60.
    Ewe, 6 months and under 12. Fifth prize, $8.
    Ewe under 6 months. Second and fourth prizes, $30.
    Champion ewe, 1 year or over. First and second prizes, $60.
    Grand champion ewe. Second prize, diploma.
    Four animals, get of one sire. First and fourth prizes, $60.
    Two animals, produce of one ewe. Third prize, $15.
    Aged flock. First and fourth prizes, $70.
    Young flock. Third prize, $25.

GROUP ONE HUNDRED ONE

SWINE

TWO HERDS OF SWINE WERE EXHIBITED FROM NEW YORK

YORKSHIRE

A. Vroman, Carthage
    Boar, 2 years old or over. Fifth prize, $15.
    Sow, 2 years old or over. Third prize, $25.

CHESHIRES

S. G. Otis, Sherwood
    Herd bred by exhibitor. First prize, $150.

GROUP ONE HUNDRED THREE

BELGIAN HARES

Jennie M. Lockwood, Reading Center
    Doe, 4 and under 6 months, Daisy 91. Second prize
Charles Hilts, Cobleskill
    Doe under 4 months, Anona 94. Second prize
    Black Belgian buck, over 6 months, Black Jack, Jr., 102. First prize
    White Belgian Doe, over 6 months, Lady Day 96. First prize
    White Belgian doe, under 6 months, Opal 95. First prize

GROUP ONE HUNDRED FOUR

_Poultry_

Edgewood Farm, Ballston Lake
    Buff Plymouth Rock, cock. First prize
    Buff Plymouth Rock, cockerel. Sixth prize
    Buff Plymouth Rock, pullet. Second prize
    Buff Plymouth Rock, breeding pen. Seventh prize
Greystone Poultry Farm, Yonkers
    White Plymouth Rock, cock. Third prize
    Single Comb Black Minorcas, pullet. Fourth prize
    Single Comb Black Minorcas, pullet. Sixth prize
    Single Comb Black Minorcas, breeding pen. First prize
George W. Hillson, Amenia
    White Plymouth Rock, pullet. First prize
    Dark Brahma Bantam, breeding pen. First prize
    Dark Brahma Bantam, breeding pen. Second prize
    Dark Brahma Bantam, breeding pen. Fifth prize
    Light Brahma Bantam, cock. Fifth prize
    Light Brahma Bantam, cock. Sixth prize
    Light Brahma Bantam, hen. First prize
    Light Brahma Bantam, hen. Second prize
    Light Brahma Bantam, hen. Third prize
    Light Brahma Bantam, pullet. Fifth prize
    Light Brahma Bantam, pullet. Sixth prize
    Light Brahma Bantam, pullet. Seventh prize
    Light Brahma Bantam, breeding pen. Second prize
    Light Brahma Bantam, breeding pen. Fourth prize
W.T. Lord, Troy
    Buff Wyandotte, cock. Third prize
    Buff Wyandotte, cock. Fifth prize
    Buff Wyandotte, cockerel. First prize
    Buff Wyandotte, cockerel. Fourth prize
    Buff Wyandotte, cockerel. Fifth prize
    Buff Wyandotte, hen. Sixth prize
    Buff Wyandotte, hen. Seventh prize
    Buff Wyandotte, pullet. First prize
    Buff Wyandotte, pullet. Second prize
    Buff Wyandotte, pullet. Third prize
    Buff Wyandotte, pullet. Fourth prize
    Buff Wyandotte, breeding pen. Second prize
    Buff Wyandotte, breeding pen. Third prize
    Buff Wyandotte, breeding pen. Fifth prize
E.G. Wyckoff, Ithaca
    Partridge Wyandotte, hen. Seventh prize
    Partridge Wyandotte, pullet. Sixth prize
    Partridge Wyandotte, breeding pen. Second prize
    Silver Penciled Wyandotte, cock. First prize
    Silver Penciled Wyandotte, cock. Second prize
    Silver Penciled Wyandotte, cockerel. First prize
    Silver Penciled Wyandotte, hen. First prize
    Silver Penciled Wyandotte, hen. Second prize
    Silver Penciled Wyandotte, pullet. First prize
    Silver Penciled Wyandotte, pullet. Second prize
    Silver Penciled Wyandotte, breeding pen. First prize
    Silver Penciled Wyandotte, breeding pen. Second prize
    Black Leghorn, cock. First prize
    Black Leghorn, cock. Fourth prize
    Black Leghorn, cockerel. Second prize
    Black Leghorn, hen. Second prize
    Black Leghorn, hen. Third prize
    Black Leghorn, pullet. Second prize
    Black Leghorn, pullet. Fourth prize
    Black Leghorn, breeding pen. First prize
    Black Leghorn, breeding pen. Third prize
    Single Comb Buff Leghorn, cock. First prize
    Single Comb Buff Leghorn, cock. Fifth prize
    Single Comb Buff Leghorn, cockerel. Second prize
    Single Comb Buff Leghorn, breeding pen. First prize
    Single Comb White Leghorn, cock. Second prize
    Single Comb White Leghorn, cockerel. Third prize
    Single Comb White Leghorn, hen. Third prize
    Single Comb White Leghorn, hen. Fourth prize
    Single Comb White Leghorn, pullet. Third prize
E.A. Parks, Syracuse
    Partridge Wyandotte, breeding pen. Fifth prize
R.F. Alden, Deposit
    Silver Wyandotte, pullet. Sixth prize
W.R. Curtiss & Co., Ransomville
    White Wyandotte, hen. Sixth prize
    White Wyandotte, breeding pen. Third prize
    Pekin Ducks, cock. Seventh prize
    Pekin Ducks, hen. Fifth prize
D. Lincoln Orr, Orr's Mills
    White Wyandotte, pullet. Sixth prize
    Dark Brahma Bantams, breeding pen. Third prize
    Dark Brahma Bantams, breeding pen. Fourth prize
    Dark Brahma Bantams, breeding pen. Sixth prize
    Dark Brahma Bantams, breeding pen. Seventh prize
    Light Brahma Bantams, cock. First prize
    Light Brahma Bantams, cock. Second prize
    Light Brahma Bantams, cock. Third prize
    Light Brahma Bantams, cock. Fourth prize
    Light Brahma Bantams, hen. Fourth prize
    Light Brahma Bantams, hen. Fifth prize
    Light Brahma Bantams, hen. Sixth prize
    Light Brahma Bantams, hen. Seventh prize
    Light Brahma Bantams, pullet. First prize
    Light Brahma Bantams, pullet. Second prize
    Light Brahma Bantams, pullet. Third prize
    Light Brahma Bantams, pullet. Fourth prize
    Light Brahma Bantams, breeding pen. First prize
    Light Brahma Bantams, breeding pen. Third prize
J.M. Linnett, Baldwinsville
    Light Brahma, breeding pen. Seventh prize
J.F. Knox, Buffalo
    White Langshans, hen. First prize
    White Langshans, hen. Fourth prize
    White Langshans, pullet. Fifth prize
    White Langshans, breeding pen. First prize
    Black Cochin Bantams, cock. Third prize
    Black Cochin Bantams, cock. Sixth prize
    Black Cochin Bantams, cock. Seventh prize
    Black Cochin Bantams, cockerel. Sixth prize
    Black Cochin Bantams, cockerel. Seventh prize
    Black Cochin Bantams, hen. Third prize
    Black Cochin Bantams, pullet. Second prize
    Black Cochin Bantams, pullet. Fifth prize
    Black Cochin Bantams, breeding pen. First prize
Edwin H. Morris, Sparkill
    Houdans, cock. Fourth prize
    Houdans, hen. Fourth prize
    Houdans, pullet. Sixth prize
    Houdans, breeding pen. Fourth prize
    Black East Indian Ducks, cock. Second prize
    Black East Indian Ducks, cock. Third prize
    Black East Indian Ducks, hen. First prize
    Black East Indian Ducks, hen. Third prize
    Black East Indian Ducks, pullet. Second prize
    Rouen Ducks, cock. Fourth prize
    Rouen Ducks, cock. Seventh prize
    Rouen Ducks, cockerel. Fifth prize
    Rouen Ducks, cockerel. Sixth prize
    Rouen Ducks, hen. Third prize
    Rouen Ducks, hen. Seventh prize
    Rouen Ducks, pullet. Fourth prize
    Rouen Ducks, pullet. Fifth prize
E.F. McAvoy, Schenectady
    Houdans, cockerel. Third prize
    Houdans, hen. First prize
    Houdans, pullet. Fourth prize
    Houdans, breeding pen. Third prize
Henry Scheyer, Lake View
    Anconas Mottled, hen. Fourth prize
    Anconas Mottled, hen. Fifth prize
    Anconas Mottled, pullet. First prize
R.H. Quackenbush, Baldwinsville
    Blue Andalusians, cock. Fourth prize
    Blue Andalusians, pullet. Sixth prize
Storm King Poultry Yards, Cornwall-on-Hudson
    Blue Andalusians, pullet. Fourth prize
E.B. Cridler, Dansville
    S.C.B. Leghorns, cockerel. Fourth prize
    S.C.B. Leghorns, pullet. Third prize
    S.C.B. Leghorns, pullet. Fourth prize
    S.C.B. Leghorns, breeding pen. Fourth prize
William T. Liddell, Greenwich
    S.C.B. Leghorns, pullet. Fifth prize
    Rose Comb Brown Leghorns, cock. First prize
    Rose Comb Brown Leghorns, cockerel. Fifth prize
H.S. Lamson, Cameron
    Rose Comb Brown Leghorns, hen. Third prize
S.E. Smith, Norwich
    Single Comb White Leghorns, cockerel. Sixth prize
Irving F. Rice, Cortland
    Single Comb White Leghorns, hen. First prize
J.H. Santee, Yonkers
    Single Comb Black Minorcas, cock. Second prize
    Single Comb Black Minorcas, cock. Sixth prize
    Single Comb Black Minorcas, hen. Third prize
Mrs. George E. Monroe, Dryden
    Single Comb Black Minorcas, cock. Third prize
    Single Comb Black Minorcas, pullet. Second prize
    Single Comb Black Minorcas, breeding pen. Second prize
Gedney Farm, White Plains
    Single Comb Black Minorcas, hen. Fourth prize
Charles L. Seely, Afton
    White Crested Black Polish, cock. Second prize
    White Crested Black Polish, cock. Fifth prize
    White Crested Black Polish, cock. Sixth prize
    White Crested Black Polish, cockerel. Fourth prize
    White Crested Black Polish, hen. Second prize
    White Crested Black Polish, hen. Fifth prize
    White Crested Black Polish, hen. Seventh prize
    White Crested Black Polish, pullet. First prize
    White Crested Black Polish, pullet. Third prize
    White Crested Black Polish, breeding pen. First prize
Dr. A.H. Phelps, Glens Falls
    Black Cochin Bantams, hen. Seventh prize
    Black Japanese Bantams, hen. First prize
    Black Japanese Bantams, hen. Sixth prize
    Black Japanese Bantams, breeding pen. First prize
    Black Tailed Japanese Bantams, cock. Fifth prize
    Black Tailed Japanese Bantams, hen. Fifth prize
    Black Tailed Japanese Bantams, breeding pen. Second prize
    Booted White Bantams, cock. Second prize
    Booted White Bantams, hen. Second prize
    Dark Brahma Bantams, cock. First prize
    Dark Brahma Bantams, hen. Third prize
    Dark Brahma Bantams, pullet. First prize
    Cochin Partridge Bantams, cock. Fifth prize
    White Cochin Bantams, cock. Sixth prize
    Polish Buff Laced Bantams, cock. First prize
    Polish Buff Laced Bantams, cock. Second prize
    Polish Buff Laced Bantams, hen. First prize
    Polish Buff Laced Bantams, hen. Second prize
    White Crested White Polish Bantams, cock. Second prize
    White Crested White Polish Bantams, hen. Fourth prize
    White Crested White Polish Bantams, hen. Fifth prize
    White Crested White Bearded Polish Bantams, cock. Third prize
    White Crested White Bearded Polish Bantams, cockerel. Fourth prize
    White Crested White Bearded Polish Bantams, hen. Second prize
    White Crested White Bearded Polish Bantams, pullet. Fifth prize
    Black African Bantams, cock. Seventh prize
    White African Bantams, cock. Third prize
    White African Bantams, cockerel. Fourth prize
    White African Bantams, hen. Fourth prize
    White African Bantams, pullet. Fifth prize
    Golden Seabright Bantams, hen. Second prize
    Silver Seabright Bantams, cock. Sixth prize
    Birchen, cock. First prize
    Birchen, hen. First prize
    Black Breasted Red Bantams, cock. Second Prize
    Black Breasted Red Bantams, hen. Fourth prize
    Golden Duckling, cock. First prize
    Golden Duckling, cockerel. Second prize
    Golden Duckling, pullet. Second prize
    Silver Duckling, cock. Second prize
    Silver Duckling, cockerel. First prize
    Silver Duckling, hen
    Silver Duckling, pullet. Second prize
    Red Pyle Game Bantams, cock. Second prize
    Miscellaneous Frissles, cock. Second prize
    Miscellaneous Frissles, cock. Third prize
    Miscellaneous Frissles, hen. Second prize
    Miscellaneous Frissles, hen. Sixth prize
    Miscellaneous Silkies, cock. Third prize
    Miscellaneous Silkies, hen. First prize
    Miscellaneous Sultans, pullet. Second prize
    Indian Game Bantams, cock. Second prize
    Indian Game Bantams, cockerel. First prize
    Indian Game Bantams, hen. Second prize
    Indian Game Bantams, pullet. Second prize
    N.Y. Salmon Faverolles, cock. First prize
    N.Y. Ermine Faverolles, cock. First prize
    N.Y. Salmon Faverolles, cock. Second prize
    N.Y. Black Faverolle, cockerel. First prize
    N.Y. Salmon Faverolle, cockerel. First prize
    N.Y. Salmon Faverolle, cockerel. Second prize
    N.Y. Ermine Faverolle, hen. First prize
    N.Y. Salmon Faverolle, hen. First prize
    N.Y. Salmon Faverolle, hen. Second prize
    N.Y. Ermine Faverolle, pullet. First prize
    N.Y. Blue Faverolle, pullet. First prize
    N.Y. Black Faverolle, pullet. First prize
    N.Y. Salmon Faverolle, pullet. First prize
    N.Y. Salmon Faverolle, pullet. Second prize
    N.Y. Salmon Faverolle, breeding pen. First prize
    N.Y. Salmon Faverolle, breeding pen. Second prize
    Barred White Plymouth Rock, bantams, cock. First prize
    Barred White Plymouth Rock, cockerel. First prize
    Barred White Plymouth Rock, pullet. First prize
    Barred White Plymouth Rock, breeding pen. First prize
    Rumpless, cock. Second prize
    Rumpless, hen. Second prize
    Sicilian, cock. First prize
    Sicilian, hen. First prize
    Campinos, hen. First prize
    Gray Japanese Bantam, cock. Second prize
    Gray Japanese Bantam, hen. Second prize
    Lakenfelders, cock. First prize
    Lakenfelders, cock. Second prize
    Lakenfelders, cock. Fourth prize
    Lakenfelders, cockerel. First prize
    Lakenfelders, cockerel. Second prize
    Lakenfelders, cockerel. Third prize
    Lakenfelders, cockerel. Fourth prize
    Lakenfelders, hen. First prize
    Lakenfelders, hen. Second prize
    Lakenfelders, hen. Third prize
    Lakenfelders, hen. Fifth prize
    Lakenfelders, pullet. First prize
    Lakenfelders, pullet. Second prize
    Lakenfelders, pullet. Third prize
    Lakenfelders, pullet. Fifth prize
    Lakenfelders, breeding pen. First prize
    Lakenfelders, breeding pen. Second prize
    Lakenfelders, breeding pen. Third prize
    Lakenfelders, breeding pen. Fourth prize
    Campines, pullet. First prize
    Campines, breeding pen. First prize
    Cuckoo Cochins, cock. First prize
    Cuckoo Cochins, cockerel. First prize
    Cuckoo Cochins, hen. First prize
    Cuckoo Cochins, pullet. First prize
    Rose Comb Blues, cock. First prize
    Rose Comb Blues, cockerel. First prize
    Rose Comb Blues, hen. First prize
    Rose Comb Blues, pullet. First prize
W.A. Smith, Whitney's Point
    Black African Bantams, hen. Third prize
    Black Cochin Bantams, hen. Second prize
    Brown Red Game Bantams, cockerel. Second prize
    Brown Red Game Bantams, pullet. Second prize
    Buff Cochin Bantams, hen. Seventh prize
    Gray Call Ducks, cock. First prize
    White Call Ducks, hen. First prize
J.A. Sprakers, Sprakers
    White Game, cockerel. Second prize
    White Game, pullet. Second prize
    White Game, pullet. Third prize
    White Game, breeding pen: Second prize
G.B. Babcock, Jamestown
    Toulouse Geese, cock. Seventh prize
    Toulouse Geese, cockerel. Second prize
    Toulouse Geese, cockerel. Fourth prize
    Toulouse Geese, hen. Fourth prize
    Toulouse Geese, pullet. Second prize
    Toulouse Geese, pullet. Fourth prize
Jonas Hayner, Livingston
    S.C. White Orpingtons, cockerel. Seventh prize

_Pigeons_

J.F. Knox, Buffalo
    Red or Yellow Fantail, cock. Second prize
    Red Fantail, hen, Second prize
    Red or Yellow Fantail, 1904. Sixth prize
    Any Color Saddle Fantail, cock. Third prize
    Any Color Saddle Fantail, cock. Fourth prize
    Any Color Saddle Fantail, hen. First prize
    Any Color Saddle Fantail, 1904. Third prize
    Any Color Saddle Fantail, 1904. Fourth prize
    Black Pigmy Pouter, hen. Second prize
    Black Pigmy Pouter, hen. Third prize
    Black Pigmy Pouter, 1904. Fifth prize
    Black Pigmy Pouter, 1904. Sixth prize
    Blue Pigmy Pouter, cock., Second prize
    Blue Pigmy Pouter, cock. Third prize
    Blue Pigmy Pouter, hen. Fourth prize
    Red or Yellow Pigmy Pouter, cock. Second prize
    Red or Yellow Pigmy Pouter, 1904. Third prize
    Red or Yellow Pigmy Pouter, 1904. Fourth prize
    Red or Yellow Pigmy Pouter, 1904. Seventh prize
    White Pigmy Pouter, hen. First prize
    White Pigmy Pouter, hen. Fifth prize
    White Pigmy Pouter, 1904. Second prize
J.H. Duer, Buffalo
    White Working Homer, cock. Third prize
    White Working Homer, hen. Sixth prize
    White Working Homer, 1904. First prize
    White Working Homer, 1904. Second prize
    White Working Homer, 1904. Fourth prize
    White Working Homer, 1904. Fifth prize
Dr. L.H. Jones, Rome
    Black Pigmy Pouter, cock. Fourth prize
    Black Pigmy Pouter, 1904. Second prize
    Black Pigmy Pouter, 1904. Fourth prize
    Blue Pigmy Pouter, cock Sixth prize
    Blue Pigmy Pouter, hen. Second prize
    Blue Pigmy Pouter, hen. Sixth prize
    Blue Pigmy Pouter, 1904. Second prize
    Blue Pigmy Pouter, 1904. Fourth prize
    Blue Pigmy Pouter, 1904. Sixth prize
    Red or Yellow Pigmy Pouter, cock. Fourth prize
    Red or Yellow Pigmy Pouter, hen. First prize
    Red or Yellow Pigmy Pouter, 1904. Second prize
    Red or Yellow Pigmy Pouter, 1904. Fifth prize
    Silver Pigmy Pouter, hen. Second prize
    Silver Pigmy Pouter, 1904. Second prize
    White Pigmy Pouter, cock. Third prize
    White Pigmy Pouter, hen. Third prize
    White Pigmy Pouter, hen. Fourth prize
    White Pigmy Pouter, 1904. First prize
    White Pigmy Pouter, 1904. Fourth prize
    Any Other Color Pigmy Pouter, hen. Second prize
    Any Other Color Pigmy Pouter, 1904. First prize
    Any Other Color Pigmy Pouter, 1904. Fourth prize
    Any Other Color Pigmy Pouter, 1904. Fifth prize
J.A. Sprakers, Sprakers
    Blue Runts, hen. Third prize
    Damascene, cock. First prize
    Damascene, hen. First prize
A. Samuels, Buffalo
    Black Snip Swallow, cock. Second prize
    Black Snip Swallow, hen. Second prize
    Black Snip Swallow, hen. Fourth prize
    Black Snip Swallow, 1904. Second prize
    Black Snip Swallow, 1904. Third prize
    Blue Snip Swallow, cock. Second prize
    Blue Snip Swallow, cock. Third prize
    Blue Snip Swallow, hen. Third prize
    Blue Snip Swallow, hen. Fourth prize
    Blue Snip Swallow, 1904. First prize
    Blue Snip Swallow, 1904. Second prize
    Red Snip Swallow, cock. Second prize
    Red Snip Swallow, cock. Third prize
    Red Snip Swallow, hen. First prize
    Red Snip Swallow, hen. Second prize
    Red Snip Swallow, 1904. First prize
    Red Snip Swallow, 1904. Second prize
    Any Other Color Snip Swallow, cock. Third prize
    Any Other Color Snip Swallow, hen. Third prize
    Full Head White Barred Swallow cock. Second prize
    Full Head White Barred Swallow, cock. Third prize
    Full Head White Barred Swallow, hen. First prize
    Full Head White Barred Swallow, hen. Third prize
    Full Head White Barred Swallow, 1904. Second prize
    Full Head White Barred Swallow, 1904. Third prize
    Yellow Full Head White Barred Swallow, cock. Second prize
    Yellow Full Head White Barred Swallow, cock. Third prize
    Yellow Full Head White Barred Swallow, hen. First prize
    Yellow Full Head White Barred Swallow, hen. Second prize
    Yellow Full Head White Barred Swallow, 1904. First prize
    Yellow Full Head White Barred Swallow, 1904. Second prize
    Roller Parlor Tumblers, cock. First prize
    Roller Parlor Tumblers, hen. Second prize

[Illustration: TRANSPORTATION BUILDING]



CHAPTER XII

Horticulture Exhibit and Schedule of Awards


HORTICULTURE EXHIBIT

By CHARLES H. VICK

Superintendent of Horticulture

[Illustration]


At a meeting of the Louisiana Purchase Exposition Commission of the
State of New York, held June 10, 1903, Charles H. Vick, of Rochester,
N.Y., was appointed as Superintendent of Horticulture, and an
appropriation of $15,000 was made for the exhibit in that department.
This amount was subsequently increased to $20,000. The work was
inaugurated July first, and offices were opened at 46 Elwood building,
Rochester, N.Y.


METHODS OF SOLICITING FRUIT

Many hundred letters were mailed to the fruit growers of the State
soliciting the donation of fruit for an exhibit at St. Louis. The number
of replies received was so small that it was necessary again to
circularize the growers offering to pay a reasonable price for
exhibition fruit. Even this offer did not bring forth anything like a
sufficient quantity of fruit to make a suitable exhibit. The State was
then divided into six sections and competent men appointed to canvass
thoroughly each section and buy fruit. A large collection of fine
specimens of fruit were procured by this method, and as a result of this
canvass exhibits were procured from every fruit growing county in the
State. This fruit was all collected at the Gleason cold storage
warehouse at Brighton, near Rochester, N.Y., and on December 1, 1903, a
shipment of two cars, containing four hundred barrels of apples,
fifty-five bushel boxes of pears and forty baskets of grapes were
forwarded to the Mound City cold storage warehouse at St. Louis.


LOCATION OF EXHIBIT

The exhibit was housed in the Palace of Horticulture, which, although
located in a somewhat remote part of the grounds, received its full
share of Exposition visitors, all of whom were deeply interested in the
magnificent displays of fruit found there.

The State of New York was assigned 4,000 square feet of space
advantageously located near the northeast corner of the building. To the
west were the exhibits of Illinois and Missouri, and to the east those
of Minnesota and Washington, while Colorado bounded New York on the
south and Pennsylvania on the north. In August, New York was assigned
the space surrendered by Pennsylvania, approximately 1,200 square feet,
to accommodate the large exhibit of grapes from the Central New York
growers and from the Chautauqua Grape and Wine Association.


THE INSTALLATION

The space included three distinct sections, Nos. 40, 41 and 43,
completely surrounded by aisles, thus affording an excellent opportunity
of viewing the exhibit from all sides. On account of this an open
installation was erected. Around section 43 was thrown an open facade,
consisting of columns supporting a handsome cornice, which bore the coat
of arms of the State and the words "The State of New York" on each side.
On the cornice rested fifteen fine specimens of Boston ferns.

The fruit was displayed upon tables of varying lengths and from three to
four feet in width. In the center of this space was the office of the
Superintendent. Sections 40 and 41 were within the zone in which low
installation was required by the Exposition authorities, so that no
facade was erected in these sections, the name of the State being shown
upon handsome ornamental gilt signs, placed upon the tables and
suspended over the exhibit. The entire installation was of white enamel,
kept spotlessly clean. The plates used were of special design. The
center was white, with the monogram in green letters, "L. P. E., 1904,"
and a wide green border, with a gold band. The white and green furnished
a most appropriate background for the varicolored fruit and the effect
was most pleasing as the eye swept over the whole exhibit.


A WORD OF COMMENDATION

On the opening day of the Fair, April thirtieth, New York's exhibit of
fruit was complete in every detail. In fact of the thirty-five States,
Canada and Mexico represented, New York was the only State to have its
exhibit installed and ready for exhibition when the doors of the Palace
of Horticulture were thrown open to the public, which called forth a
special word of commendation from the Chief of the Department of
Horticulture, Honorable F. W. Taylor. Owing to the fact that at that
time the other States were not prepared to make a display, it was deemed
inadvisable to exhibit a large number of varieties, so that while the
entire space was covered with fruit, the exhibit consisted of but
thirty-one varieties of apples, ten of pears and three of grapes, as
follows:

Apples: Fallawater, Swarr, Golden Russet, Snow,
  Belleflower, Sweet Russet, Cline's Red, Red Rock, Holland
  Pippin, Hubbardston Nonesuch, Deacon Jones,
  Judson, Sklanka Bog, Peach, Sutton Beauty, Flower of
  Genesee, Baldwin, Lady, Kirkland Pippin, Greening,
  Spitzenburg, Northern Spy, Walbridge, Seek-no-Further,
  McIntosh, Grimes' Golden, Wagener, Mann, Roxbury,
  Russet, King, Canada Red
Pears: Kieffer, Duchess, Vergalieu, Josephine, Diel,
  Beurre d'Anjou, Beurre Bosc, Lawrence, Mt. Vernon,
  Beurre Clairgeau
Grapes: Virgennes, Diana, Catawba


A HIGH STANDARD OF EXCELLENCE

From the opening to the close of the Fair, December first, New York's
exhibit of fruit was maintained at a uniformly high standard of
excellence. The total number of varieties of fruit exhibited was as
follows:

Apples ......... 424 varieties
Cherries .......  31 "
Currants .......   4 "
Gooseberries ...   1 "
Grapes ......... 150 "
Pears .......... 152 "
Plums .......... 129 "
Quinces ........   8 "
Peaches ........  14 "
Strawberries ...   1 "

The Empire State far outstripped her sister States as to number of
varieties of fruit, displaying twice as many varieties of apples, pears
and plums, and more than three times as many varieties of grapes as her
nearest competitor, and this be it said, in a display of fruits never
before equaled either in size, variety or quality.


RECORD OF ENTRIES

Over 2,000 individual entries of fruit were made during the season, and
as all of the fruit was entered twice, once for the general collection
of the State and again for the grower, the total number of entries was
nearly five thousand. An accurate record was kept of all entries, the
following information being carefully tabulated:
The name and address of the exhibitor.
Date of removal from cold storage.
Date placed upon the table.
Date of removal from the table.
Remarks concerning its condition.


FRUIT of 1904

The new fruit of the fall of 1904, while free from rust and of good
color, was somewhat smaller in size than the fruit of 1903; nevertheless
it made a grand display, and from the opening to the close of the Fair
from 2,000 to 2,500 plates of fruit, including never less than 150
varieties of apples, were admired by the thousands of visitors.


APPLES

The apples placed in cold storage at St. Louis in December of 1903 were
found to be in almost perfect condition when opened in April, and, with
a few exceptions, continued so throughout the season. Most of the apples
were wrapped first in tissue and then in oiled paper and firmly packed
in barrels well lined with corrugated paper, with excelsior cushions in
each end.

Owing to the fact that so much depends upon the condition of fruit when
picked, and the necessity of placing it in cold storage as soon as
picked, it was a difficult matter to make a comparative test of the
keeping qualities of the different varieties. For instance, of two
different collections of Baldwins (one of the best keepers), placed on
the tables at the same time, one lot held up in perfect condition for
several weeks while the other went down in as many days.

The varieties showing the best keeping qualities were Baldwin,
Spitzenberg, Russet, Northern Spy and Canada Red. These varieties were
kept in cold storage and placed on the tables as late in the season as
November fifteenth, when they were found to have retained their color,
firmness and flavor.

Some of the fall varieties, which are ordinarily supposed to be poor
keepers, came out of cold storage in perfect condition and kept
remarkably well after being placed on the tables. Among these the
Alexander, Fallawater, Holland Pippin, McIntosh and Rome Beauty were the
best.

A collection of Fallawaters from W.R. Fitch, of Rushville, N.Y., were
placed on the tables April twenty-ninth, when they attracted
considerable attention on account of their unusual size and fine color,
and remained in splendid condition for weeks. While somewhat shriveled
and dried up, they showed no signs of decay when removed from the tables
July twentieth. The same is true of a collection of Holland Pippins and
McIntoshes placed on exhibition at the same time.

A collection of Alexanders from J.B. Collamer, of Hilton, will serve as
an illustration of the advantages of picking at the proper time,
handling with care and placing in cold storage immediately. These apples
were exhibited for a week at the State Fair held at Syracuse in
September of 1903. They were then wrapped, packed and sent to St. Louis,
where they were kept in cold storage until June twenty-sixth, when they
were placed on exhibition until after the visit of Governor Odell, June
twenty-ninth. On June thirtieth they were rewrapped and repacked and
sent back to cold storage until a few days before the State Fair at
Syracuse in September of 1904, when they were shipped to Syracuse and
again exhibited for a week. At the close of the State Fair they were
again returned to St. Louis and exhibited for two weeks.

The Newtown Pippin is another variety which showed excellent keeping
qualities. On August twelfth a collection of forty-six plates from Henry
D. Lewis, of Annandale, was taken out of cold storage and placed on
exhibition. They held up in good condition until the thirtieth of
August, during the hottest weather of the season.

The Greenings, while large in size, of fine color, and apparently in
perfect condition when packed, invariably came out of cold storage badly
scalded and discolored. In fact, there were only three or four lots
which were entirely free from scald.

In September, large additions of new fruit were made to the exhibit from
individual growers, and also from the New York Agricultural Experiment
Station at Geneva.

George W. Anderson, Charles N. Baker, Samuel J. Wells and T.H. King are
among the exhibitors who deserve special mention for the quality and
extent of their exhibits.

A complete list of the 424 varieties of apples exhibited appears
following the list of exhibitors.


GRAPES

The grape industry of New York had adequate and successful
representation at the St. Louis Exposition, as a department of the
general Horticultural Exhibit. This industry in New York is one of large
and steadily increasing importance. The State ranks second only to
California in the production of grapes, and the showing made in the
Horticulture building was a revelation to thousands of visitors who
there obtained their first knowledge of the extent of the viticulture
industry in New York.

This sign was conspicuously displayed over the exhibit of grapes:

"NEW YORK LEADS IN TABLE GRAPES

"600,000 acres; 30,000,000 vines; crop worth $2,763,711
annually."

These figures are from census reports, and represent an advance of 198
per cent in the industry over its condition as represented at the
Columbian Exposition in 1893. There is scarcely another such record of
increase in the whole range of industries of the United States.

No attempt was made to show viticulture in any other way than by its
product, but an almost continuous display of grapes was kept on the
tables from the opening of the Exposition to its close. This in itself
was a noteworthy achievement, for it included a display of cold storage
grapes from the crop of 1903 up to the second week of July, 1904,
something never before attempted. A display of forced fruit and early
varieties began shortly after that date.

A collection of hot-house grapes grown by Mr. David M. Dunning, of
Auburn, was an interesting feature of the grape exhibit and amazed
crowds of visitors on account of their size and handsome appearance. The
varieties were Barbarossa and Muscat Hamburg. One cluster of the latter
variety weighed nine pounds and measured seventeen inches in length,
exclusive of stem. This collection of grapes far surpassed anything of
the kind shown in the Horticulture building, not even excepting
California specimens.

The varieties in cold storage were as follows: Catawba, Diana, Iona,
Isabella, Niagara, Salem and Virgennes. Of these varieties, the Catawba
and Virgennes kept the longest. They were taken from cold storage July
third and placed upon exhibition for a week, at the end of which time
they were found to have retained their color and flavor perfectly. This
was fully one month later than grapes were preserved at the Pan-American
Exposition, notwithstanding the difference in distance between Buffalo
and St. Louis from the vineyards. The Diana and Iona were close seconds
in keeping qualities, while the Isabella rattled badly and the Niagara
showed discoloration, though both retained fairly good flavor.

The display proper of the 1904 crop began early in September. This
display was entirely made up of fruit contributed by the growers of the
Chautauqua and Keuka Lake districts. These two districts were
represented about in proportion to their acreages and products.

The grapes were well wrapped in paper and packed in a new style paper
grape basket, furnished by Mullen Bros. Paper Company, of St. Joseph,
Michigan. These baskets were packed in spring crates, and the grapes,
with a very few exceptions, carried in perfect condition.

The grape exhibit was made adjacent to the rest of the New York exhibit.
The tables afforded room for about 2,000 plates. The display was made up
largely of Concord, Catawba, Niagara, Virgennes, Campbell Early and
other commercial varieties.

The rarer varieties, however, were not neglected, as will be seen from
the list of one hundred and fifty varieties appearing elsewhere.


PEARS

In October of 1903, fifty-five bushel boxes of pears were placed in cold
storage to be used for the Exposition. Of this number, twenty-five boxes
were purchased from David K. Bell, of Brighton, and the balance came in
single bushels from some of the best growers of the State. The pears,
like the apples, were wrapped first in heavy tissue paper and then in
oiled paper.

The following is a list of the varieties kept in cold storage: Beurre
d'Anjou, Beurre Bosc, Beurre Clairgeau, Beurre Diel, Angouleme,
Columbia, Duchess, Howell, Josephine of Malines, Kieffer, Lawrence, Mt.
Vernon, Rutter and Vergalieu.

On April twenty-fifth, when the boxes were examined and a selection made
for the opening day, the Duchess was found in poorer condition than any
of the other varieties. Notwithstanding this fact, a continuous exhibit
of Duchess pears was made until May thirtieth. All the other varieties
were in prime condition, and were displayed in lots of fifty plates
until May twenty-sixth, when one grand exhibit was made, consisting of
four hundred plates of fifteen varieties. This display continued in good
condition until the sixteenth of June, in spite of the extreme hot
weather at that time, the Anjou, Angouleme, Bosc, Clairgeau, Columbia,
Howell and Kieffer keeping extremely well until that date.

The display in the fall of 1904 attracted a great deal of attention, not
alone from visitors, but also from the superintendents of horticulture
from the other States and from fruit growers in general. On September
nineteenth, one hundred and forty-two varieties were exhibited from
Ellwanger & Barry, of Rochester; on September twenty-first, twenty
varieties were exhibited from David K. Bell, of Brighton, in addition to
the general display from almost every section of the State, making an
exhibit of pears never before equaled.

A complete list of the one hundred and fifty-two varieties of pears
exhibited will be found following the list of exhibitors.


PLUMS

As the result of a bountiful plum crop, the display of this luscious and
popular fruit was unusually large and fine. The first shipment,
consisting of Early Red June, was received from F. E. Dawley, of
Fayetteville, on August fifth, and from that time until September
twenty-sixth, additions were made almost daily. One hundred and
twenty-eight varieties, arrayed on hundreds of plates, and occupying
nearly a third of the New York space, compelled the attention and
admiration of every passer-by. And indeed, it was an attractive sight,
from the stand-point of color alone, comprising, as it did, nearly every
shade of green, yellow, purple, blue, orange and red.

The varieties attracting the most attention were Abundance, Arch Duke,
Burbank, Coe's Golden Drop, Grand Duke, Quackenboss and St. Lawrence.
The display of Burbank was the largest and finest ever shown, the best
two lots coming from Fred H. Teats, of Williamson, and T. H. King, of
Trumansburg.

Splendid collections were also received from F. E. Dawley, of
Fayetteville, consisting of eleven varieties; S. D. Willard, of Geneva,
twenty-three varieties; New York Agricultural Experiment Station, at
Geneva, one hundred and five varieties.

A total of one hundred and twenty-eight varieties were exhibited; all of
the varieties are listed following the list of exhibitors.


CHERRIES

Thirty-one varieties of cherries were exhibited, the largest exhibit
coming from the New York Agricultural Experiment Station. No other State
excelled in number of varieties.

See the list following the list of exhibitors.


PEACHES

New York's peach crop was not up to the usual standard, being more or
less infected with rust and lacking in color. It was also found to be a
difficult matter to get shipments to St. Louis in good condition.

There were liberal quantities of such varieties as were shown, a list of
which appears following the list of exhibitors.


QUINCES

The crop of 1904 was unusually small and inferior in quality.
Nevertheless a fairly good exhibit was made.

The varieties shown appear following the list of exhibitors.


CURRANTS

It was impossible to make a general display of small fruits, owing to
the distance from New York to St. Louis. Four varieties of currants were
shown, however, the Perfection Currant, from C. G. Hooker, of Rochester,
excelling in size, quality and flavor any currant exhibited.

A list of varieties appears following the list of exhibitors.


GOOSEBERRIES

The gooseberry crop was a total failure in New York, and only one small
exhibit was made of the Downing.


STRAWBERRIES

It was the intention to make a large exhibit of strawberries, and
arrangements were partially made with Mr. L. J. Farmer, of Pulaski, to
collect this exhibit, but owing to the very poor condition of shipments
received from Illinois, Missouri and other nearby States, the plan was
abandoned, as it was feared that the berries would be spoiled in
transit. One exhibit, however, was made. This was the Ryckman strawberry
and came from G. E. Ryckman, of Brocton. Owing to extreme care in
packing, this small exhibit came in fairly good condition, and excited
much comment on account of its size, color, fine flavor and prolific
production.


PLANTS AND FLOWERS

The exhibit of plants and flowers was, for the most part, made out of
doors in beds, which were attractively laid out in the grounds
surrounding the Horticulture and Agriculture buildings. The extent of
the grounds afforded opportunity for the massing of the different
varieties of hardy plants, such as roses, peonies, hydrangeas, and also
of the newer varieties of cannas and geraniums. In the conservatory
adjoining the Horticulture building proper were exhibited fine
collections of ferns and a large display of gladiolas, and also one of
peonies.


SOME GRATIFYING COMPARISONS

The following statistics from the United States census of 1903 may be of
interest:

New York leads in the production of fruit, exclusive of subtropical
fruits. Twelve and one-tenth per cent of the fruit production of the
United States is in New York.

Orchard fruit of 1903 was valued at            $10,542,272
Grapes of 1903 were valued at                    2,763,711
Small fruits of 1903 were valued at              2,538,363

The following table will give an idea of the extensive cultivation of
small fruits:
                                      Acres Product-quarts

Raspberries                          12,376     17,575,530
Strawberries                          7,311     13,846,860
Currants                              2,594      4,584,080
Blackberries                          2,060      3,167,090
Other berries                           710        862,107

                            Number of vines Product-pounds

Grapes                           29,636,316    247,689,056

From the following a comparison may be drawn between the number of trees
and apple product of the two leading apple states:

                            Number of trees Product-bushels

New York                         15,054,832     24,111,257
Missouri                         20,040,399      6,496,436

The average number of apple trees per farm in the United States was
74.5; the same for New York was 86.2. The average production in bushels
per farm in the United States was 64.8; the same for New York was 138.1.

A considerable proportion of the trees in Missouri, quoted above, are
young trees, and the relative products will soon show far different
results unless New York fruit growers awake to the situation. In all of
the western fruit growing states the annual planting of young trees is
rapidly increasing, a precaution which our fruit growers are not taking
to any great extent. Moreover, the lack of interest on the part of New
York growers in expositions and the opportunity there afforded for
advertising the superiority of New York products is a subject for
comment. It is in marked contrast to the interest and progressive spirit
of the growers in the western states who never lose such an opportunity,
and are gradually working into the front ranks of fruit production. In
many of the western states no public funds nor machinery were provided
for a horticultural exhibit at St. Louis, but very creditable exhibits
were prepared, the entire expense of the same being borne by fruit
growers' associations. In marked contrast is a rather unfortunate
precedent heretofore adopted in the State of New York, and of necessity
followed at St. Louis, viz.: That the State, in order to obtain a
creditable exhibit, must pay a fancy price for fruit for exhibition
purposes and allow the seller to receive the award upon fruit which is
no longer his own property.


THE STAFF

In addition to the superintendent the staff connected with the
department consisted of James G. Patterson, of Sheridan, assistant
superintendent; John W. Coughtry, of New Scotland, and Sherman T. Lewis,
of Johnsonburg, assistants in charge of fruit exhibit; A. M. Loomis, of
Fredonia, assistant in charge of viticulture, and Miss Bessie J.
Hutchinson, of Rochester, stenographer. One and all they served the
Commission and the State faithfully and efficiently.


AWARDS

The State received a total of 295 awards, divided as follows: A grand
prize for installation, a grand prize for the collective State exhibit
of fruit, 19 gold medals, 142 silver medals and 132 bronze medals. Owing
to the rules and regulations governing the system of awards, however,
prizes were not so freely distributed as at the World's Fair at Chicago,
or the Pan American Exposition at Buffalo. Heretofore it has always been
the custom to allow the exhibitor a medal for a collection of apples,
another for a collection of pears, another for plums, etc., while at St.
Louis only one award was allowed an exhibitor for his entire collective
exhibit. The jury in the Department of Horticulture was on duty
throughout the Exposition period, and as soon as an exhibit was placed
upon the tables it was promptly passed upon by the jury, due application
having been made.


_Catalogue of Exhibitors in the Department of Horticulture, with the
Award, if Any, Received by Each_


GROUP ONE HUNDRED SEVEN

_Pomology_

F. M. Adams, Fredonia. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Pocklington, Martha, Concord
Frank Abbott, Pulteney. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Catawba, Concord, Eumelan, Diana, Delaware
George Aldrich, Sheridan. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Concord, Niagara, Pocklington
B. C. Allen, Holley. Silver medal
  Apples
    Roxbury, Russet, Snow
James Allen, Nliddleport. Silver medal
  Apples
    Baldwin, Greening, Twenty Ounce, King
M. L. Allen, Seneca Falls. Silver medal
  Apples
    Gilliflower, Northern Spy
Clark Allis, Medina
  Apples
    Stump
G. W. Anderson, South Onondaga. Silver medal
  Apples
    Twenty Ounce, King, Tallman Sweet, Peck's Pleasant, Northern Spy,
      Red Canada
W. W. Anderson, Gasport. Silver medal
  Apples
    Northern Spy, Greening, Snow
Marcus Ansley, Geneva. Bronze medal
  Pears
    Kieffer, Duchesse, Beurre Bosc
Lewis Archer, Hilton. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Baldwin, Cooper's Market, Roxbury Russet
Charles E. Artman, Le Roy. Bronze medal
  Apples
    King
George Bacon, Scriba. Bronze medal
  Apples
  Baldwin
Charles N. Baker, Selkirk. Silver medal
  Apples
    Peck's Pleasant, Northern Spy, Langford Seedling, Black Twig,
    Bagdanoff, Baldwin, Salome, Red Russet, Wagener, Scott's Winter,
    Winter Sweet, Newtown Pippin, Sutton Beauty, Tallman Sweet, Phoenix,
    Gilliflower, Golden Russet, Roxbury Russet, Willow Twig, Vandervere,
    McIntosh, Pound Sweet, Mother, Wolf River, Milding, Yellow
    Belleflower, Esopus Spitzenberg
C. M. Bailey, Pulteney. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Concord, Catawba
Fred Baright, Van Wagoner. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Red Belleflower, Stark
R. A. Barnes, Lockport. Silver medal
  Pears
    Bartlett
W. A. Bassett, Farmer. Bronze medal
  Apples
    King, Peck's Pleasant, Hendrick Sweet
R. Bassett, Hilton. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Baldwin
  Peaches
    Late Crawford
F. M. Beattie, Brighton. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Northern Spy
C. Bechstedt, Oswego. Silver medal
  Apples
    Stump, Garden Royal, Unknown
David K. Bell, West Brighton. Silver medal
  Apples
    Mother
  Quinces
    Rhea's Mammoth
  Pears
    Josephine, Diel, Columbia, Clairgeau, Anjou, Winter Nellis,
    Bartlett, Superfin, Bose, Kieffer, Duchesse, Kinsessing, Louise
    Bonne, Pitmaston, Doyenne Boussock, Lawrence, Bergamot, Easter,
    Seckel, White Doyenne, Fred Clapp, Sheldon
L. J. Bellis, Crosby. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Diana, Iona
E. S. Bender, New Scotland. Silver medal
  Apples
    Pewaukee, Rambo, Spitzenberg, Greening, Northern Spy,
    Lady Sweet, Pomme Grise, Roxbury, Russet
W. T. Benjamin, Fredonia. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Martha, Worden, Delaware
David W. Bennett, New Salem. Silver medal
  Apples
    Snow, Northern Spy, Baldwin, Rome Beauty
James Berryman, Bluff Point. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Catawba, Salem, Concord, Isabella, Niagara, Moore's Diamond,
      Pocklington
William Bradley, Pavilion. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Babbett, Cooper's Market, Northern Spy
L. G. Brainard, Ellington. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Gilliflower
E. T. Brizzee, Canandaigua. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Bailey Sweet, Belleflower
W. H. Brower, Arlington. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Crow Egg, Lawver, Gilliflower, Newtown Pippin, Baldwin
W. D. Brown, Pulteney. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Delaware, Concord, Niagara, Catawba
E. J. Brwen, Albion. Silver medal
  Apples
    King, Canada Red, Baldwin, Roxbury Russet, Northern Spy
A. B. Boyd, Pulteney. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Delaware, Concord, Worden, Ives' Seedling, Niagara, Brighton
J. V. Boyd, Pulteney
  Grapes
    Catawba, Concord
John W. Bullock, Brocton. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Concord
F. D. Burger, Pulteney
  Grapes
    Catawba, Iona, Isabella
Mrs. Hiram Burgess, Newark. Bronze medal
  Apples
    White Graft, Smokehouse
F. W. Campbell, Esopus. Silver medal
  Apples
    Greening
Thomas Cant, Clarksville. Silver medal
  Apples
    Spitzenberg, Fall Pippin, McIntosh
  Pears
    Lawrence, Sheldon, Anjou, Howell
O. J. Chamberlain, Brocton. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Concord, Niagara
Austin L. Champion, Schenectady. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Spitzenberg, Baldwin, Northern Spy, Red Winter Pippin
E. W. Chapman, Gasport. Silver medal
  Apples
    Snow, Nonesuch, Northern Spy
William Chillson, Fairdale. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Pound Sweet
M. A. Christman, Pavilion. Silver medal
  Apples
    Seek-no-Further
Fred W. Clark, Pavilion. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Northern Spy, Spitzenberg
J. E. Cline, Massena. Silver medal
  Apples
    Golden Russet, Snow, Belleflower, Sweet Russet, Cline's Red,
    Red Rock, Ben Davis, Blue Pearmain, Sweet
H. B. Clothier, Silver Creek. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Concord, Niagara
F. B. Clothier, Silver Creek. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Concord
I. D. Cook & Son. South Byron
  Apples
    Peck's Pleasant, Tallman Sweet, Corey Pippin, Seek-no-Further
F. H. Cookingham, Cherry Creek
  Apples
    McIntosh, Maiden Blush, Mann
J. B. Collamer & Sons, Hilton. Silver medal
  Apples
    Alexander, Sweet Bough, Wealthy, Baldwin
  Plums
    Burbank
E. J. Cole, Sheridan. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Delaware, Salem, Concord, Niagara, Jessica
James E. Cole, Fulton
  Apples
    Rhode Island Greening
Ed. Colvin, Fredonia. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Niagara, Worden, Campbell's Early
E. R. Concklin, Pomona. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Sutton Beauty, Baldwin, Pomeroy, Wagener
J. J. Conroy, Hilton. Silver medal
  Apples
    Baldwin, Nonesuch
J. B. Corkhill, Seneca Falls. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Gilliflower, Canada Red, Lady
H. A. Cosman, Hilton. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Canada Red, Ben Davis, Snow
Charles Covell, Lockport. Silver medal
  Apples
    King
F. Cozzens, Appleton. Silver medal
  Apples.
    Rhode island Greening, Tallman Sweet
Craig Colony, Sonyea. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Surprise, Sweet Henry, Pearmain, Dakota Sweet, Rhode
    Island Greening, Tallman Sweet, Baldwin, Gilliflower,
    Northern Spy, Bell Bond, Sweet Russet, Pound Sweet
A. B. Cranston, Sheridan. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Delaware, Worden
S. S. Crissey, Fredonia. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Worden, Hartford, Green Mountain, Empire State, Wyoming
    Red, Ives' Black, Iona, Martha, Telegraph, Moore's
    Diamond, Concord, Pocklington
Fred Crosby, Crosby. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Empire State, Moore's Diamond, Catawba, Martha, Duchesse,
    Jefferson, Diana, Concord
John W. Crosier, Hall's Corners. Silver medal
  Apples
    Pearmain, Canada Red, Baldwin
A. S. Cross, Pulteney. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Concord
Cross & Uhl, Arlington. Silver medal
  Apples
    King, Snow, Northern Spy
Crossgrove Bros., Ripley. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Concord, Niagara
Robert B. Crowell, Walkill. Silver medal
  Apples
    Russet Greening, Rambo, Pewaukee, Fallawater, Newtown
    Pippin, Snow, Grimes' Golden, Red Canada, Lady Sweet
Culver Bros., Bluff Point. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Delaware, Catawba, Concord, Niagara, Moore's Diamond,
    Pocklington
O. P. Curtis, Hilton. Bronze medal
  Pears
    Clapp's Favorite
  Plums
    Burbank
James Curtis & Son, Hilton. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Greening, King, Snow, Holland Pippin, Baldwin
  Pears
    Duchesse
F. E. Dawley, Fayetteville. Silver medal
  Apples
    Sweet Bough, Early Harvest, Red Astrachan, Yellow Transparent,
    Primate, Strawberry, Summer Pippin, Hawley,
    Grimes' Golden, Wine, Bismarck, English Streak, Red
    Romanite
  Cherries
    Dawley
  Pears
    Clapp's Favorite, Seckel, Japanese
  Plums
    Seedling Japanese, Abundance, Primate, Red June, Burbank,
    Japanese Wineberry, Red Negate, Shropshire Damson,
    Tragedy Prune, Cooper, Lombard
Day Bros., Dunkirk. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Ives, Diana, Concord, Martha, Marion
David Dean, Oswego
  Apples
    Northern Spy
H. Dean, Aurora. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Concord
John DeWitt, Bluff Point. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Catawba
George Dorman, Fredonia. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Niagara
A. C. Doty, Sheridan. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Brighton, Pocklington, Niagara, Delaware
C. E. Drake, Stanley. Silver medal
  Apples
    Smokehouse, Swaar, Winter Pippin, King, Bell Bond,
    Ontario
Charles W. Driggs, Elba. Silver medal
  Apples
    Roxbury Russet, Baldwin, Northern Spy
R. C. Dunkelberger, Gasport. Silver medal
  Apples
    Baldwin, Roxbury Russet, Mann, Ben Davis, Cranberry
    Pippin
David M. Dunning, Auburn. Gold medal
  Apples
    Alexander, King
  Grapes
    Barbarosa, Muscat Hamburg
  Pears
    Clairgeau
N.J. Durfee, Pavilion. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Snow, Baldwin, Northern Spy, Wagener
Sylvester Edeck, Olcott. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Cranberry Pippin
  Pears
    Kieffer
L.L. Edmunds, Holley. Silver medal
  Apples
    Lady Sweet, Spitzenberg, Nonesuch, Pound Sweet, Gilliflower,
    Martin
John Elliott, Morton. Silver medal
  Apples
    Nonesuch, Holland Pippin
Ellwanger & Barry, Rochester. Gold medal
  Apples
    Arabskoe, Alexander, Albion, Amasias, Aucuba-leaved Reinette,
    Ballarat Seedling, Bismarck, Black Detroit, Black Gilliflower,
    Belle de Boskopp, Baldwin, Bohanan, Blanche de Bournay,
    Blanche d'Espagne, Beauty of Kent, Ben Davis, Belle
    d'Angers, Brittle Sweet, Brownlee's Russet, Barry, Buckingham,
    Christiana, Cox's Pomona, Court Penduplat, Coe's Scarlet
    Perfume, Canada Reinette, Danford, Duke of Devonshire, Dr.
    Oppel's French Pippin, Dumclow's Seedling, Downing's Paragon,
    English Royal Russet, Evening Party, Equimetely, Excelsior,
    Esopus Spitzenberg, Fall Pippin, Flower of Kent, Fall
    Orange, Fameuse, Fameuse Sucre, Glidden No. 3, Golden
    Sweet, Gelber Richard, Grosse Bohnapfel, Golden Russet,
    Hurlbut, Hester, Hartford Sweet, Hubbardston Nonesuch,
    Hennepin, Idaho, Julia, Jackson, Johnson, Jonathan, Josephine
    Kreuter, Keswick Codlin, King of Pippins, Krouzex,
    Kelsey, Kikitia, Klaproth, Knox Russet, Lord Suffieid, Lindenwald,
    London Pippin, Lowell, Lady Hennicker, Liberty,
    Lehigh, Long Stem, Magneta, Menagere, Minister, Mother,
    Monmouth Pippin, McLellan, Marston's Red Winter, Milding,
    Neversink, Nickajack, Nicolayer, Norton's Melon, Northern Spy,
    Oustin's Pippin, Peter No. 12, Plumb's Cider, Pryor's
    Red, Pickman, Pomme Grise, Pigeon de Schibler, Reinette
    Monstrouse, Rhode Island Greening, Reinette Jaune Hative,
    Reinette Bretagne, Riviere, Reinette gris de Versailles, Ribston
    Pippin, Red Warrior, Red Canada, Roxbury Russet, Red
    Beitingheimer, Sheppard's Perfection, Signe Tilisu, Schackleford,
    Smokehouse, Swaar, Sol Edwards, Stott's Seedling, Seneca
    Sweet, Summer Hagloe, Sweet Pearmain, Stump, Stark, Sutton
    Beauty, Spaeth's Sameling, Soulard, Transparent de Croucels,
    Turn-off Lane, Shannon, Twenty Ounce, Virginia Greening,
    Wealthy Wagener, White Pippin, White Robinson, Winter
    Pearmain, Winesap, Washington Strawberry, Wormsley's Pippin,
    York Imperial, Yellow Belleflower
  Pears
    Admiral Cecil, America, Angelique le Clerc, Angouleme,
    Angouleme Bronzee, Anjou, Ansault, Antoine Lormier, Auguste
    Royer, Bergamot Buffo, Bergamot Heitrich, Bergamot
    Royal d'Hiver, Beurre Alex Lucas, Beurre d'Aremburg,
    Beurre Benoist Noveaux, Beurre Capiaumont, Beurre Diel,
    Beurre Dumont, Beurre gris d'Hiver, Beurre Mauxion, Beurre
    Moire, Bezi de la Motte, Black Worcester, Bonchretian Vermont,
    Boussock, Brockworth Park, B. S. Fox, Buffam, Cabot,
    Canandaigua, Catherine Gardette, Catinka, Chapman, Church,
    Clairgeau, Columbia, Col. Wilder, Comice, Comte de Lamy,
    Comte de Paris, Conseiller de la Cour, Delices d'Huy, Delices
    de Mons, DeLamartine, Desiree Cornelis, Dix, Dorset, Dow,
    Doyenne d'Alencon, Doyenne Boussock, Doyenne Dillon,
    Doyenne Gray, Doyenne Jamain, Doyenne Robin, Doyenne
    Sieulle, Dr. Nellis, Duchesse de Bordeaux, Duchesse Precoce,
    Duhamel du Monceau, Eastern Belle, Easter Beurre, Edmunds,
    Emile d'Heyst, Figue d'Alencon, Figue de Naples,
    Fred Clapp, Gansel's Bergamot, Gansel's Seckel, Hardy, Homewood,
    Hoosic, Island, Jackson, Jalousie de Fontenay, Jones,
    Kieffer, Kingsessing, Kirtland, Knight's Seedling, Lady Clapp,
    La France, Langalier, Lawrence, Le Comte, Lodge, Louise
    Bonne de Jersey, Loveaux, Mace, Magnate, Miller, Minister,*
    Dr. Lucius, Mount Vernon, Mme. Blanche Sannier, Mme.
    Treyve, Napoleon, Oswego Beurre, Pardee's Seedling, Passe
    Crasanne, Pater Noster, Paul Ambre, P. Barry, Pierre Corneille,
    Pitmaston Duchesse, Poire Louise, Pound, President
    Gilbert, Prince Consort, Prince's St. Germain, Rapalje's Seedling,
    Raymond de Montlaux, Reeder, Refreshing, Rousselet
    Bivort, Sarah, Seckel, Secretaire Rodin, Serrurier, Sheldon,
    Soulard Bergamot, Souv. d'Esper, Souv. de Lens, Souv. de la
    Marcau Trou, Souv. de la Reine des Belges, Souv. Sannier
    Pere St. Andre, Sterling, Superfin, Tyson, Urbaniste, Van
    Buren, Vergalieu No. 4, Washington, White Doyenne, Winter
    Nelis
B. C. Fairchild, Willsboro. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Northern Spy, Fallawater, Wagener
William H. Falls, Gasport. Silver medal
  Apples
    King, Nonesuch, Lawyer, Baldwin, Tallman Sweet, Golden
    Russet, Roxbury Russet
E. H. Fay, Portland. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Stark Star
A. A. Fay, Brocton. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Concord, Niagara, Delaware
Finch & Horrocks, Bluff Point. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Catawba, Niagara, Moore's Diamond
W. R. Finch & Son, Rushville. Silver medal
  Apples
    Fallawater, Swaar, Spitzenberg
Foster & Griffith, Fredonia. Silver medal
  Apples
    Fall Pippin, Abundance, Bradshaw, Red Beitengheimer,
    Alexander, Black Detroit, Northern Spy, King, Ox, Maiden
    Blush, St. Lawrence, Plunker Sweet, Fallawater, Orange
    Pippin, Twenty Ounce, Duchess of Oldenburg
  Grapes
    Iona Red Rare, Vergennes, Delaware, Agawam, Jessica
    White, Lucile, Lindley Rogers No. 9, Moyer Red
B. W. Frazer, Fredonia. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Concord, Catawba
Howard S. Fullager, Penn Yan. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Northern Spy, Greening, Wagener
J. H. Gamby, Bluff Point. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Concord
John B. Garbutt, Middleport. Silver medal
  Apples
    Duchess of Oldenburg, Wealthy
J. V. Gaskell, Gasport. Silver medal.
  Apples
    Northern Spy, Pound Sweet, King
Geneva Experiment Station, Geneva. Gold medal
  Apples
    Albion, Alexander, Amasias, Aporte Orientale, August,
    Benoni, Bismarck, Bohana, Breskorka, Canada Baldwin,
    Canada Reinette, Caroline Red June, Charlock Reinette,
    Christiana, Coon Red, Count Orloff, Crott's, Deacon
    Jones, Dickinson, Doctor, Dudley Winter, Duncan, Edwards,
    Elgin Pippin, Enormous, Etowah, Ewalt, Excelsior,
    Fall Pippin, Ferdinand, Fishkill, Gideon, Gideon Sweet, Golden
    Medal, Golden Russet, Grandmother, Grand Duke Constantine,
    Great Mogul, Groscoe Slenka Greenle, Grundy, Hartford
    Rose, Haskell Sweet, Haywood, Herefordshire Beefing, Holland,
    Iowa Beauty, Jacob Sweet, Jones' Seedling, Jonathan
    Buler, Judson, Juicy Krimtartar, July Cluster, Keswick, Kirkland,
    Landsbergere Reinette, Lawver, Manchester, Magog Red
    Streak, McIntosh, McMahon, Milding, Milon, Milligan, Millott,
    Monmouth, Monroe, Moon, Moore Sweet, Mother, Mountain
    Sweet, Moyer's Bride, Munson, Nelson, Newman's Seedling,
    Northwestern Greening, Ohio Pippin, Olive, Paragon, Paul's
    Imperial Crab, Peach, Pear, Persian Bogdanoff, Piper, Pride
    of Texas, Reinette Coux, Rhodes Orange, Rolfe, Roxbury
    Russet, Salome, Scott's Winter, Skelton, Sklanka Bog, Small's
    Admirable, Standard, Stark, Stayman's Winesap, Striped Winter,
    Stuart Golden, Sutton Beauty, Swaar, Swinku, Thompson,
    Titus Pippin, Tobias, Tobias Black, Tobias Pippin, Tom Putt,
    Van Hoy, Wabash Red Winter, Wallace Howard, Washington
    Royal, Washington Strawberry, Watwood, Western Beauty,
    White Zurdell, Williams Favorite, Winter Bananna, Winter
    Golden, York Imperial
  Cherries
    Hoke, Ida, May Duke, King's Amarelle, Esel Kirche, Elton,
    Double Nattie, Dyehouse, Orel No. 23, Gov. Wood, Black
    Tartarian, Mercer, Rockport Bigarreau, Knight's Early Red,
    Early Purple Guigne, Large Montmorency, Abesse de Pigmes,
    Transcendant, Downer's Late, Napoleon Yellow Spanish,
    Windsor, Bay State, Mezel, Olivet, Rapp, Luelling, Reine
    Hortense, Sparhawk's Honey, Montmorency
  Grapes
    Hicks, Moyer, Canandaigua, Telegraph, Champion, Early
    Victor, Riehl No. 22, McPike, Elvibach, Marion, Niagara, Isabella
    Seedling, Rupert, Arminia, Corby, Hartford, Livingston,
    Riehl No. 10, Janesville, August Giant, Eumelan, Merrimack,
    Prentiss, Dracut Amber, Manito, Mary Favorite, Greene,
    Horner No. 1, Diamond, Lucile, Mary Washington, Adirondack,
    Browne, Worden, Colerain, Presley, Concord, Moore's
    Early, Riehl No. 21, Cayuga, St. Louis, Rockwood, Jewell,
    Campbell, Emerald, Waupanuka, Butler No. 1, R. W. Munson,
    Essex, Barry, Pulaski, Thompson No. 7, Paragon, Wyoming
    Red, Nectar, Herbert, Gold Coin, Perfection, Creveling,
    Rebecca, Campbell's Early, Caywood No. 50, Brighton,
    Winchell, Dr. Hexamer, Delaware, Faith, Peabody, Requa,
    Etta, Chautauqua, Jessica, Lutie, Poughkeepsie, Olita, Berckman,
    America, Golden Grain, Osage, Thompson No. 5, Columbian
    Imperial, Northern Muscatine, Rogers No. 13, Red Eagle,
    Agawam, Wilder, Hercules, Little Blue, Maxatawney, Kensington,
    Helen Keller, Massasoit, Gold Dust, Martha, Station
    No. 797
  Plums
    Yosebe, Engre, Japanese Seedling, Shiro, Oullin Golden,
    Prunus Simoni, Climax, Hale, King of Damson, Berger,
    Duane's Purple, Coe's Golden Drop, Monarch, Newman, Chabot,
    Grand Duke, White Nicholas, Saunders, Burbank, Washington,
    Mariana, De Caradenec, St. Lawrence, Field, Shipper,
    Hector, Early Orange, World Beater, Normand, Poole's Pride,
    Robe de Sargent, Harriet, Abundance, Bartlett, Merunka,
    Combination, Pacific, Bailey, Imperial Gage, Yellow, Baray's Green
    Gage, White Kelsey, Paragon, Maru, Orient, Mogul, Arch
    Duke, Royal Hative, Pottawatamie, Gold, Niagara, Hiederman
    Sand Cherry, Victoria, Autumn Comport, Baker, Pond's Seedling,
    Miles, Palatine, America, October Purple, French Prune,
    Quackenboss, King of Damson, Transparent, Spalding, Late
    Black Orleans, Shropshire, Damson, Ungarrish Prune, Wickson,
    Sweet Botan, Coe's Purple Drop, Reine Claude, Grant
    Prune, Dame Aubert, Pringle Blue, Freestone Damson,
    Pringle Purple, Clingstein, Hudson River Purple Egg, Wild
    Goose, G. No. 44, Jones, McLaughlin, Eagle, Yeddo, Goliath,
    Jefferson, Gold Drop, Belgian Purple, Diamond, Tennant,
    Tragedy Prune, Mikado, Kirk, Yellow Egg, Cabot, Uchi Beni,
    Union Purple, Geuthrie Late, Saratoga, Monroe
George Geringer, Childs. Silver medal
  Apples
    Baldwin, Northern Spy
John Gibson, Catawba. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Niagara
Edwin S. Gifford, Lockport. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Greening
John D. Gilligan, Crown Point. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Northern Spy, Bethel
George A. Gilson, Sheridan. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Agawam, Concord, Martha, Worden
P. Gleavey, Bluff Point. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Concord, Moore's Diamond, Niagara
E. J. Gleason, Keuka. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Catawba
E. P. Gould, Rochester. Bronze medal
  Pears
    Beurre Clairgeau
J. H. Giffin, Catawba. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Catawba, Isabella
S. S. Grandin, Westfield. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Concord, Niagara
C. B. Gray, Albion. Silver medal
  Apples
    Golden Russet, Hubbardston Nonesuch, King
E. A. Guest, Fredonia. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Concord, Cottage, Niagara, Vergennes, White Chautauqua
J. A. Hall, Catawba. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Alvira, Catawba, Concord, Delaware, Diana, Dutchess, Isabella,
    Pocklington
M. H. Hamilton, Westfield. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Concord
E. E. Hamlet, Sheridan. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Delaware, Moore's Early, Niagara, Worden
James H. Hanlon, Linwood. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Baldwin, Duchess of Oldenburg, King, Red Astrachan,
    Northern Spy
  Plums
    White Japan, Burbank
W. C. Harden. Stanton Hill. Silver medal
  Apples
    Pomeroy, Sutton Beauty
F. P. Hardenburg, Brocton. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Concord
E. T. Hart, Fredonia. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Catawba, Clinton, Isabella
F. P. Hazelton, Le Roy. Silver medal
  Apples
    Alexander, Black Gilliflower, Cooper's Market, Lady, Swaar,
    St. Lawrence
  Pears
    Beurre Bosc
J. A. Hepworth, Marlboro. Silver medal
  Apples
    Domine, Lady Sweet, Snow
  Currants
    Filler
  Pears
    Beurre Bosc, Clairgeau, Duchesse
Grant G. Hitchings, South Onondaga. Silver medal
  Apples
    Pewaukee, Rhode Island Greening, Wealthy, Jonathan,
    Seek-no-Further, Red Canada, Spitzenberg, Fallawater,
    Northern Spy, Romanite, Gilliflower, Cranberry Pippin,
    Ben Davis, Walbridge, Hubbardston Nonesuch, Pound
    Sweet
Elton B. Holden, Hilton. Silver medal
  Apples
    Cooper's Market, Cranberry Pippin, York Pippin
C. G. Hooker, Rochester. Gold medal
  Currants
    Perfection
E. R. Hopkins, Sheridan. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Lindley, Concord
S. O. Hubbard, Pavilion. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Northern Spy, Snow
J. A. Hulbert, South Onondaga. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Douse
T. S. Hubbard Nursery Co., Fredonia. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Eaton, Moore's Diamond, Wyoming Red, Empire State,
    Cynthiana, Brilliant, Woodruff Red, Early Daisy, Rommel,
    Berckman Red, Brighton, Dracut Amber, Gaertner, Moyer,
    Niagara, Goethe, Campbell's Early, Telegraph, Lutie Red,
    Janesville, Early Ohio, White Diamond, Etta, Concord,
    Early Victor, Cottage, Jessica, Norton, Green Mountain,
    Lucile, Moore's Reissling, Delaware
Elias B. Hutchinson, Pavilion. Silver medal
  Apples
    Golden Russet, Peck's Pleasant, Phoenix
J. S. Hutt, Cobleskill. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Hook
J. Corwin Jacks, Batavia. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Flower of Genesee
Ira S. Jarvis, Hartwick Seminary. Bronze medal
  Apples
    English Russet, Ross, Nonpareil
George S. Josselyn, Fredonia. Gold medal
  Grapes
    Campbell's Early, Eaton, Barry, Pocklington, Dracut Amber,
    Lindley, Massasoit, Diana, Victoria, Herbert, Montefiore,
    Amenia, Wyoming Red, Wilder, Moyer, Catawba, Telegraph,
    Concord, Esther, Martha, Green Mountain, Lucile,
    Worden, Brighton, Early Victor, Vergennes, Salem,
    Woodruff Red, Alice, Cottage, Noah, Ulster Prolific, Agawam,
    Etta, Clinton, Goethe, Niagara, Delaware, Moore's
    Diamond, Janesville, Moore's Early, Jefferson
F. I. Judd, Batavia. Silver medal
  Apples
    Golden Russet, Greening, Roxbury Russet, Northern Spy
Alfred Jorgensen, Bluff Point. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Concord, Niagara
M. H. Kelly, Wyoming. Silver medal
  Apples
    Roxbury Russet
Herman L. Kent, Westfield. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Catawba, Concord, Isabella, Kent's Favorite
John G. Kettle, Schodack Landing. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Baldwin, Blush Pippin, Bristol, Esopus Spitzenberg, Greening,
    Mann, Pomeroy Sweet, Stark
John C. Ketchum, Schenectady. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Baldwin, N ewtown Pippin, Northern Spy, Spitzenberg, Vandevere
George M. Kinner, Fredonia. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Concord, Salem, North Carolina, Worden, Niagara, Perkins,
    Rogers No. 15, Massasoit, Catawba, Delaware, Rogers No.
    9, Rogers No. 8 Black, Rogers No. 33 Black, Martha
P. W. King, Athens. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Baldwin, Northern Spy, Roxbury Russet, Spitzenberg
T. H. King, Trumansburg. Silver medal
  Apples
    Hendrick Sweet, Northern Spy, Seek-no-Further, Hubbardston
    Nonesuch, King, McIntosh, Ben Davis, Fall Pippin
  Peaches
    Carman, Elberta, Hill's Chili, Kalamazoo, Stevens' Rare Ripe
  Pears
    Kieffer
  Plums
    Burbank
E. H. Kinyoun, Bluff Point. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Concord, Moore's Diamond, Niagara
Frank P. Kinyoun & Co., Penn Yan. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Concord, Niagara
Judson N. Knapp, Syracuse. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Knapp's Prolific, Pound Sweet
E. Ben Knight, Bluff Point. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Concord
Lake View Nursery Co., Sheridan. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Eaton, Agawam, Lindley, Clinton
E. W. Lamont, Cobleskill. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Baldwin, Ben Davis, Greening, Hannah Kazoot, Kirkland
    Pippin, Lady, Spitzenberg
A. R. Lathrop, Brocton. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Concord
Fred B. Leibring, Gasport. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Greening, King
C. N. Leonard, Penfield. Silver medal
  Apples
    Cooper's Market, Golden Russet, Greening, Northern Spy,
    Phoenix
Henry D. Lewis, Annandale. Silver medal
  Apples
    Newtown Pippin
H. J. Lewis, Ripley. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Concord, Niagara
S. T. Lewis, Johnsonburg. Bronze medal
  Plums
    Burbank, Mary, Delaware, Bradshaw, Giant Prune, Imperial
    Gage, juicy, Jefferson, General Hand, Apple, Satsuma,
    Osto Smomo, Pearl, Gueii
P. R. Loder, Bluff Point. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Vergennes
C. W. Mackey, Coxsackie. Silver medal
  Apples
    Baldwin, Pomeroy, Snow, Spitzenberg
H. Manchester, Lockport. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Cranberry Pippin, Northern Spy, King
Willis T. Mann, Barker. Silver medal
  Apples
    Boiken, Cranberry Pippin, Mann, Sutton Beauty
Arlington Mapes, Stanley. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Crown.
U. P. Markham, Fredonia
  Grapes
    Delaware
I. H. Marvin, Albion. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Greening, Hubbardston Nonesuch, King
H. R. Mason, Ripley. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Concord
O. C. Mather, Albion. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Lady
A. Ross Matheson, Pomona. Silver medal
  Apples
    Baldwin, Fallawater
A. G. Meiklejohn, Putnam Station. Silver medal
  Apples
    Ben Davis, Bethel, Blue Pearmain, Greening, McIntosh Red,
    Northern Spy, Tallman Sweet, Snow
W. D. Merrick, Albion
  Pears
    Anjou, Clairgeau, Duchesse, Howell
W. W. Metcalf, Castile. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Baldwin, Canada Red, Greening, Northern Spy
H. R. McNair, Dansville. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Grimes' Golden, Mann, McIntosh, Peck's Pleasant,
    Seekno-Further, Wagener, Walbridge
W. S. Millard, Joshua. Silver medal
  Apples
    Rhode Island Greening
Fred Miller, Penn Yan. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Gilliflower, Greening, King, Northern Spy, Smokehouse,
    Spitzenberg, Tallman Sweet
George Miller, Naples. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Catawba, Salem, Vergennes
Robert Miller, Sheridan. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Agawam, Brighton, Catawba, Concord, Delaware, Diana,
    Martha, Moore's Diamond, Pocklington
C. D. Mills, Wellsville. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Wolf River
C. D. Miner, Lima. Silver medal
  Apples
    Duchess of Oldenburg, King, Red Astrachan, Sweet Bough
A. A. Mitchell, Palmyra. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Canada Reinette, Domine, Vandevere
W. C. Moore, Bluff Point. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Niagara
W. Seward Mudge, Gasport. Silver medal
  Apples
    Baldwin, Greening, Northern Spy
G. E. & E. H. Munt, Le Roy. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Rambo
Mrs. I. Neff, Bluff Point. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Delaware, Brighton, Agawam, Moore's Diamond
William Newton, Henrietta. Bronze medal
  Pears
    Anjou, Lawrence
New York State. Collective exhibit. Grand prize
  Apples
    424 varieties
  Cherries
    31 varieties
  Currants
    4 varieties
  Gooseberries
    1 variety
  Grapes
    150 varieties
  Peaches
    14 varieties
  Pears
    152 varieties
  Plums
    129 varieties
  Quinces
    8 varieties
  Strawberries
    1 variety
New York Grape Growers' Association. Gold medal
    Grapes
O'Brien & Morse, Sheridan. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Agawam, Moore's Early
H. H. Ostrander, Salt Point. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Canada Red, Snow.
Gottlieb Otto, Gasport. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Northern Spy
John J. Ovens, Crosby. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Catawba
Levi A. Page, Seneca Castle. Silver medal
  Apples
    Baldwin, Canada Red, Gilliflower, Roxbury Russet
George D. Parker, Bluff Point. Silver medal
  Apples
    Northern Spy
James G. Patterson, Sheridan. Silver medal
  Apples
    Duchess of Oldenburg, Virginia Sweet, Western Beauty
  Plums
    Burbank
J. W. Patterson, Ripley. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Concord
S. Patterson, Bluff Point. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Concord, Delaware, Empire State, Moore's Diamond, Niagara,
    Pocklington
Fayette E. Pease, Lockport. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Baldwin, Jonathan
William B. Pepper, Branchport. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Concord, Delaware, Diana, Empire State, Golden Pocklington.
D. Perry, Bluff Point. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Niagara
J. E. Perry, Pulteney. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Concord
W. R. Perry, Rushville. Bronze medal
  Pears
    Vergalieu
George Pettit, Lyndonville. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Roxbury Russet
Mrs. Laura Pettit, Brocton. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Agawam, Moore's Early
Merton Phelps, Castile. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Belleflower, Blue Pearmain, Peck's Pleasant, Tallman Sweet
    Unknown
M. F. Pierson, Stanley. Silver medal
  Apples
    Boiken, Canada Red, Cooper's Market, Delaware Red, Winter,
    Ewalt, Gano, Kirkland, Lady, Lady Sweet, Rome Beauty,
    Scott's Winter, Sutton Beauty
  Pears
    Columbia, Kieffer
W. H. Pillow, Canandaigua. Silver medal
  Peaches
    Lemon Cling, Late Crawford, Elberta, Champion, Old
    Nixon, Willet
  Pears
    Vermont Beauty, Howell, Clairgeau, Louise Bonne, Pitmaston
    Duchesse
  Plums
    Grand Duke, Frost Damson, Blue Damson, Reine Claude,
    Arch Duke, Stanton, Italian Prune, French Prune
  Quinces
    Orange
E. C. Porter, Sauquoit. Silver medal
  Apples
    Gloria Mundi, Spitzenberg
George T. Powell, Ghent. Silver medal
  Apples
    Fall Pippin, Fall Strawberry, Gravenstein, Hubbardston
    Nonesuch, King, Jonathan, Red Winter Sweet, Roxbury
    Russet, Lady Sweet, Sutton Beauty, Twenty Ounce,
    Transcendant Crab
Jesse A. Putnam, Fredonia. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Cottage, Eaton, Lucile, Pocklington, Telegraph, Worden
H. J. Rater, Ripley. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Concord
George H. Remer, Penn Yan. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Concord, Delaware, Moore's Diamond
George P. Reed, Honeoye. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Vergennes
George S. Reeves, Marion. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Rome Beauty
A. Reisinger, Naples. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Catawba, Diana, Isabella, Iona
J. F. Riker, Lakeside. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Fall Pippin, King
John T. Roberts, Syracuse
  Apples
    Fall Pippin
William Roberts, Lockport. Bronze medal
  Apples
    King
Barney Roach, Penn Yan. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Concord, Delaware, Moore's Diamond, Niagara
William H. Roeper, Wyoming. Silver medal
  Apples
    Northern Spy, Roxbury Russet, Red Astrachan, Sweet Bough,
    Black Detroit, Duchess of Oldenburg, Strawberry, Black
    Gilliflower, Steele's Red, Bottle Greening
  Pears
    Bartlett, Tyson
Lewis Roesch, Fredonia. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Early Daisy, Moore's Diamond
  Plums
    Shipper's Pride, Satsuma
Charles R. Roff, Pulteney. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Niagara, Catawba
W. P. Rogers, Williamson. Silver medal
  Apples
    Baldwin, Gravenstein, Greening, King, Maiden Blush
William H. Rossiter, Despatch. Silver medal
  Apples
    King
L. A. Rowe, Barnard. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Canada Red, Henry Sweet, Hubbardston Nonesuch
G. E. Ryckman & Son, Brocton. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Lutie, White Delaware, Green Mountain, Agawam, Diana,
    Isabella, Martha, Niagara, Delaware Seedling, Diamond
  Strawberries
    Ryckman
  Lemons
    American Wonder
L. R. Ryckman, Brocton. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Niagara
B. H. Sackett, Keuka. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Empire State, Niagara
J. V. Salisbury, Phelps. Silver medal
  Apples
    Greening, Hendrick Sweet, Swaar, Seek-no-Further, Spitzenberg,
    Tallman Sweet, Fall Pippin, Twenty Ounce, King
Joseph Sanderson, Bluff Point. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Concord, Catawba, Diana, Niagara, Salem
R. Sanderson, Pulteney. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Delaware, Moore's Diamond, Niagara, Pocklington, Salem
E. L. Seely, Lafayette. Silver medal
  Apples
    English Stripe, Gilliflower, Prior's Red, Rock, Sweet Greening,
    Spitzenberg
A. F. Selby, Williamson. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Baldwin, Geniton
Guy A. Selmser, Waterloo. Silver medal
  Apples
    Baldwin, Greening, Northern Spy, Pewaukee, Rambo, Vandevere
J. D. Sherman, Castile. Silver medal
  Apples
    Baldwin, Black Gilliflower, Fallawater, Swaar, Seek-no-Further,
    Yellow Belleflower
Aaron Shofmyer, Schenectady. Silver medal
  Apples
    Northern Spy, Spice, Spitzenberg
John D. Silsby, Lockport. Bronze medal
  Apples
    King, Greening
I. M. Slingerland, Fayetteville. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Cranberry Pippin, Hendrick Sweet, Seek-no-Further, Slingerland
Henry Smith, Fredonia. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Brighton, Fredonia, Niagara, Woodruff Red
W. I. Smith, Hilton. Gold medal
  Apples
    Alexander, Fall Pippin, Northern Spy, Spitzenberg,
    Seek-no-Further, Twenty Ounce
  Peaches
    Elberta
Smith & Boyce, Holley. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Snow
F. H. Snyder, Ghent. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Alexander, Gravenstein, Wealthy
M. A. Soverhill, Newark. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Lady, Rambo, Willow Twig
S. Stace, Barnard. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Baldwin, Greening, King
C. L. Stearns, Clay. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Baldwin, Belleflower, Northern Spy, Peck's Pleasant, Rome
    Beauty, Sterns, Winter Pippin
Jason L. Stearns, Cardiff. Silver medal
  Apples
    Red Astrachan, Maiden Blush, Strawberry
  Pears
    Clapp's Favorite, Flemish Beauty, Sheldon
Willis C. Streeter, Fulton. Silver medal
  Apples
    Twenty Ounce, Ribston Pippin, Fall Strawberry,Red Astrachan,
    Ox, King, Rhode Island Greening, Northern Spy,
    Sops of Wine, English Russet, Lowell, Mother, Gilliflower,
    Roxbury Russet, Golden Russet, Rock Greening,
    Egg Top, Golden Sweet, Pound Sweet, Spice, Duchess,
    Cranberry Pippin, Belleflower, Sweet Russet, McIntosh,
    Alexander, Monmouth Pippin, Twenty Ounce Pippin, Red
    and Green Sweet, Detroit Red, Culbert, Bitter Sweet,
    Early Strawberry, Porter, Peck's Pleasant, Phoenix, Cabashea,
    Yellow Belleflower, Spitzenberg
John Striker, Pulteney. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Catawba
Tallman & Christy, Ripley. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Concord
Fred H. Teats, Williamson. Silver medal
  Plums
    Burbank
Delos Tenny, Hilton. Silver medal
  Apples
    Greening, Roxbury Russet
W. S. Teator, Upper Red Hook. Bronze medal.
  Apples
    Baldwin, Fallawater, Greening, Northern Spy, Stark
Clarence Tenny, Hilton. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Baldwin
N. Tenny & Sons, Hamlin. Bronze medal
  Currants
    Pres. Wilder, Black Champion
  Gooseberries
    Downing
Mrs. H. J. Thayer, Fredonia. Silver medal
  Apples
    Red Astrachan
A. M. Thayer, Pulteney. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Catawba, Concord
James K. Thayer, Penn Yan. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Catawba, Concord, Niagara
Fred Tillman, Catawba. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Concord, Delaware, Diana, Niagara
E. B. Tolles, Sheridan. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Agawam, Concord, Martha, Wyoming Red
Howard H. Tozer, Naples. Silver medal
  Apples
    Rambo, Seek-no-Further
  Pears
    Flemish Beauty
S. J. Turk, Fredonia. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Niagara
John S. Van Allen, Selkirk. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Baldwin, Northern Spy
J. P. Van Buren, Stockport. Silver medal
  Apples
    Lady
Robert L. Van Dusen, Newark
  Pears
    Rutter
F. E. Van Eps, Stanley. Silver medal
  Apples
    Primate, Astrachan, Autumn Strawberrv, Yellow Transparent,
    Spitzenberg, Vandevere, Smokehouse, Gravenstein,
    Maiden Blush
W. H. Van Sickles, Union Springs. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Tallow Pippin
W. H. Van Vliet, South Schodack. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Newtown Pippin
Abram Van Vranken & Sons, Vischer's Ferry. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Northern Spy
H. S. Vermilyea, Chelsea. Bronze medal
  Apples
    Baldwin, Northern Spy
James Vick's Sons, Rochester. Silver medal
  Apples
    Rhode Island Greening
F. Vroom, Pulteney. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Concord, Niagara, Salem
S. W. Wadhams, Clarkson. Bronze medal
  Peaches
    Crosby, Elberta
J. E. Wakeman, Lockport. Silver medal
  Apples
    Spitzenberg, Northern Spy
Ward Fruit Co., Ravena. Silver medal
  Apples
    Fall Pippin, Greening, Northern Spy, Spitzenberg
Henry D. Warner, Clifton Springs
  Apples
    Limber Twig
Ira Watson, Fredonia. Silver medal
  Apples
    Alexander, Sweet Bough
H. E. Wellman, Kendall. Silver medal
  Apples
    Baldwin, Golden Russet, Rhode Island Greening
Samuel J. Wells, Fayetteville. Silver medal
  Apples
    King, Fall Pippin, Pound Sweet, Fall Greening, Swaar,
    Onondaga Sweet, Seek-no-Further, Rambo, Gilliflower,
    Alfred Sweet, Hubbardston Nonesuch, Rome Beauty, Lady
    Sweet, Steele's Red Winter, Spitzenberg, Red Astrachan,
    Yellow Transparent, Sweet Bough, Cornell, Golden Sweet
  Grapes
    Niagara, Isabella, Iona, Diana, Vergennes
  Pears
    Comet
Walter E. Wetmore, Wilson. Silver medal
  Apples
    Mann
T. D. Whitney, Flint. Silver medal
  Apples
    Dutchess, Primate, Sweet Bough
E. P. Willard, Cayuga. Bronze medal.
  Pears
    Beurre Bose, Clairgeau, Duchess
S. D. Willard, Geneva. Gold medal
  Apples.
    Stump, Martha Crab, Windsor Chief, Wealthy, North Star,
    Red Russet, Swaar, Black Gilliflower, Duchess, White
    Streak
  Peaches.
    Horton River, Wadell.
  Pears.
    White Doyenne, Beurre Clairgeau, Worden Seckel.
  Plums.
    America, Hale, Quackenboss, Arch Duke, Imperial Gage,
    Palmer's Favorite, Copper, Blue Damson, Coe's Golden
    Drop, Hudson River Purple Egg, Peters' Yellow Gage,
    Smith's Late Blue, Reine Claude, Grand Duke, Monarch,
    Geuii, Middleburgh, Lombard, Stanton's Seedling, Coe's
    Late Red, Shropshire, Wickson
  Quinces
    Orange
A. H. Wilcox, Gasport. Silver medal
  Apples
    Baldwin, Greening
I. A. Wilcox, Portland. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Campbell, Clinton, Delaware, Moore's Early, Vergennes
J. H. Windsor, Brockton. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Concord, Moore's Diamond, Niagara
M. Witherby, Brockton. Bronze medal
  Grapes
    Concord
Albert W. Wood & Son, Carlton Station. Silver medal
  Apples
    Cabashea, King, Hubbardston Nonesuch, Roxbury Russet
William W. Yost, Waterloo. Silver medal
  Apples
    Hendrick Sweet, King
Philip Zimmer, Keuka. Silver medal
  Grapes
    Catawba, Niagara
George Zorn, Hilton. Silver medal
  Apples
    Northern Spy, Roxbury Russet, Spitzenberg, Swaar


GROUP ONE HUNDRED EIGHT

_Trees, Shrubs, Ornamental Plants and Flowers_

Fred Beaulieu, Woodhaven, L. I., hose support. Silver Medal
Charlton Nursery Co., Rochester, peonies. Gold Medal
Cottage Garden Co., Queens, L. I., peonies. Silver Medal
Ellwanger & Barry, Rochester, trees and shrubs. Gold Medal
J. Roscoe Fuller, Floral Park, cannas. Silver Medal
Samuel Gilbert Harris, Tarrytown, roses. Gold Medal
William F. Kasting, Buffalo, cannas. Gold Medal
William F. Kasting, Buffalo, ferns. Gold Medal
F. R. Pierson & Co., Tarrytown, ferns. Gold Medal
John Scott, Brooklyn, ferns. Gold Medal
Siebrecht & Sons, New Rochelle, ferns. Gold Medal
Siebrecht & Sons, New Rochelle, trees and shrubs. Gold Medal
J. M. Thorburn & Co., New York, bulbs. Silver Medal
Arthur Cowee, Berlin, gladiolas

_General Collaborator_

Charles H. Vick, Rochester, Superintendent of Horticulture. Gold
    Medal

The following is a list of the varieties of fruits exhibited:

_Apples_

Albion
Alexander
Alfred Sweet
Amasias
America
Ananarnoe
Arabskoe
Arkansas Beauty
Aporte Orientale
Aucuba-leaved Reinette
August
Autumn Strawberry
Austin Pippin
Babbitt
Bagdanoff
Bailey Sweet
Baldwin
Barry
Beauty of Kent
Bell Bond
Belle de Boskoop
Belle d' Angers
Belleflower
Ben Davis
Benoni
Bethel
Bietingheimer
Bismarck
Bitter Sweet
Boiken
Black
Black Detroit
Black Gilliflower
Black Twig
Blanche de Bournay
Blue Pearmain
Blanche d'Espagne
Blush Pippin
Bohana
Bottle Greening
Breskora
Bristol
Brittle Sweet
Brownlee's Russet
Buckingham
Cabashea
Canada Baldwin
Canada Reinette
Canada Red
Carlaugh
Caroline Red June
Cathead Russet
Centennial
Chenango Strawberry
Chillicothe Sweet
Christiana
Clark
Cline's Red
Coe's Scarlet Perfume
Coffey's Beauty
Colvert
Coon Red
Cooper's Market
Corey Pippin
Cornell
Count Orloff
Court Penduplat
Cox's Pomona
Cranberry Pippin
Crow Egg
Crown
Crott's
Culbert
Cullum's Keeper
Dakota Sweet
Danford
Deacon Jones
Delaware Red Winter
Denton Seedling
Detroit Red
Dickinson
Doctor
Domine
Douse
Downing's Paragon
Dr. Opple's French Pippin
Duchess of Oldenburg
Dudley Winter
Duke of Devonshire
Dumclow's Seedling
Duncan
Early Joe
Early Strawberry
Edwards
Egg Top
Elgin Pippin
English Russet
English Royal Russet
English Stripe
Enormous
Equimetely
Esopus Spitzenberg
Etowah
Evening Party
Ewalt
Excelsior
Excelsior Crab
Fallawater
Fall Pippin
Fall Greening
Fall Jenneting
Fall Orange
Fall Strawberry
Fameuse
Fameuse Sucre
Fanny
Ferguson Stat
Ferdinand
Fishkill
Flemish Spitzenberg
Flower of Genesee
Flower of Kent
French Pippin
Gano
Garden Royal
Gelber Richard
Gen. Grant Crab
Geniton
Gideon
Gideon Sweet
Gilliflower
Gladstone
Glidden No. 3
Gloria Mundae
Golden Medal
Golden Russet
Golden Sweet
Grandmother
Grand Duke Constantine
Gravenstein
Great Mogul
Greasy Pippin
Greening
Green Crimean
Grimes' Golden
Grosse Bohnapfel
Groscoe Slenka Greenle
Grundy
Haas
Hannah Kazoot
Hartford Sweet
Hartford Rose
Haskell Sweet
Hawley
Haywood
Hendricks Sweet
Hennepin
Henry Sweet
Herefordshire Beefing
Hermiker
Hester
Holland
Holland Pippin
Hook
Hubbardston Nonesuch
Hurlbut
Hyslop Crab
Idaho
Iowa Beauty
Jackson
Jacob
Jacob Sweet
Johnson
Jones' Seedling
Jonathan
Jonathan Buler
Josephine Kreuter
Judson
Juicy Krimtartar
Julian
July Cluster
Kelsey
Keswick
Keswick Codlin
Kikitia
King
King of Pippin
Kirkland
Kirkland Pippin
Klaproth
Knapp's Prolific
Knox Russet
Krouzex
Lady
Lady Crab
Lady Elgin Crab
Lady Henniker
Lady Sweet
Landsberger Reinette
Langford Seedling
Lawver
Lehigh
Liberty
Limber Twig
Lindenwald
Long Stem
Lord Nelson
Lord Suffield
Louden Pippin
Lowell
Maiden Blush
Magenta
Marston's Red Winter
Mann
Manchester
Magog Red Streak
Mannington Pearmain
Martha Crab
Menagerie
McIntosh
McIntosh Red
McLellan
McMahon
Milding
Milan
Milligan
Millot
Minister
Monmouth
Monmouth Pippin
Monroe
Moon
Moore Sweet
Mother
Mountain Sweet
Moyer's Pride
Munson
Nelson
Newtown Pippin
Newman's Seedling
Neversink
Nickajack
Nicolayer
Northern Spy
North Star
Northwestern Greening
Norton's Melon
Ohio Pippin
Olive
Onondaga Sweet
Ontario
Orange Crab
Orange Pippin
Ornament de Table
Oustin's Pippin
Ox
Paragon
Paul's Imperial Crab
Peach
Pear
Pearmain
Peck's Pleasant
Pennock
Persian Bagdanoff
Peter No. 12
Pewaukee
Phoenix
Pickman
Pigeon de Schiller
Piper
Parrish Bly
Plumb's Cider
Plunker Sweet
Pomeroy
Pomeroy Sweet
Pomme Grise
Porter
Pound Pippin
Pound Sweet
Pride of Texas
Priestly
Primate
Prior's Red
Queene Anne
Rambo
Rawle's Janet
Red Astrachan
Red Beitingheimer
Red Belleflower
Red Rock
Red Russet
Red Siberian Crab
Red Winter Pippin
Red Winter Sweet
Red Warrior
Reinette Bretagne
Reinette Coux
Reinette grin de Versailles
Reinette Jaune Hative
Reinette Monstrouse
Rhode Island Greening
Rhodes' Orange
Ribston Pippin
Richards
Riviere
Rock
Rock Greening
Rolfe
Romanite
Rome Beauty
Rose Sweet
Ross Nonpareil
Roxbury Russet
Russian No. 1
Russian Queen
Russian Seedling
Salome
Sandy Glass
Schackleford
Scott's Winter
Seedling No. 11
Seedling No. 12
Seedling No. 13
Seedling No. 19
Seedling No. 21
Seedling No. 22
Seek-no-Further
Seneca Favorite
Seneca Sweet
Shannon
Sheppard's Perfection
Siberian Crab
Signe Tilissu
Skelton
Sklanka Bog
Slingerland
Small's Admirable
Smokehouse
Snow
Sol Edwards
Soulard
Sour Russet
Spaeth's Sameling
Spice
Spitzenberg
Standard
Stark
Stayman's Winesap
Steele's Red Winter
Sterns
St. Lawrence
Stott's Seedling
Strawberry
Striped Astrachan
Striped Winter
Stuart Golden
Stump
Summer Hagloe
Summer Pippin
Summer Rambo
Surprise
Sutton Beauty
Swaar
Sweet Bough
Sweet Greening
Sweet Pearmain
Sweet Russet
Sweet Russian
Swinku
Tallman Sweet
Tallow Pippin
Tewksbury
Thompson
Titus Pippin
Tobias
Tobias Black
Tobias Pippin
Tom Putt
Transcendant Crab
Transparent de Croucels
Turn-off Lane
Twenty Ounce
Twenty Ounce Pippin
Un-named
Vandevere
Van Hoy
Virginia Greening
Virginia Sweet
Wabash Red Winter
Wagener
Walbridge
Wallace Howard
Washington Royal
Washington Strawberry
Watwood
Wealthy
Welker Beauty
Welker's Seedling
Western Beauty
White Graft
White Pippin
White Robinson
White Streak
White Zurdell
Whitney's Crab
Williams Favorite
Willow Twig
Windsor Chief
Wild Crab
Wine
Winesap
Winter Banana
Winter Golden
Winter Pearmain
Winter Pippin
Winter Sweet
Wolf River
Wormsley's Pippin
Yellow Belleflower
Yellow Transparent
York Imperial
York Pippin


_Grapes_

Adirondack
Agawam
Alice
Alvira
America
Armenia
August Giant
Barbarosa
Barry
Berckman
Berckman Red
Brighton
Brilliant
Brown
Butler No. 1
Campbell
Campbell's Early
Canandaigua
Catawba
Cayuga
Champion
Chautauqua
Clinton
Colerain
Columbia Imperial
Concord
Corby
Cottage
Creveling
Cynthiana
Delaware
Delaware Seedling
Diamond
Diana
Dracut Amber
Dutchess
Early Daisy
Early Ohio
Early Victor
Eaton
Elvibach
Emerald
Empire State
Essex
Esther
Etta
Eumelan
Faith
Fredonia
Gaertner
Goethe
Gold Coin
Gold Dust
Golden Grain
Golden Pocklington
Greene
Green Mountain
Hartford
Helen Kellar
Herbert
Hercules
Hicks
Horner No. 1
Iona
Iona Red Rare
Isabella
Isabella Seedling
Ives
Ives Black
Ives Seedling
Janesville
Jefferson
Jessica
Jessica White
Jewell
Kent's Favorite
Kensington
Lindley Rogers
Little Blue
Livingston
Lucile
Lutie
Lutie Red
Manito
Marion
Martha
Mary Favorite
Mary Washington
Massasoit
Maxatawny
McPike
Merrimack
Montefiore
Moore's Diamond
Moore's Early
Moore's Reissling
Moyer
Moyer Red
Muscat Hamburg
Nectar
Niagara
Noah
North Carolina
Norton
Northern Mascadine
Olita
Osage
Paragon
Peabody
Perkins
Perfection
Pocklington
Poughkeepsie
Presley
Prentiss
Pulaski
Rebecca
Red Eagle
Requa
Riehl No. 10
Riehl No. 21
Riehl No. 22
Rockwood
Rodgers No. 8 Black
Rodgers No. 9
Rodgers No. 13
Rodgers No. 15
Rodgers No. 32
Rodgers No. 33 Black
Rommel
Rupert
R. W. Munson
Salem
Station No. 797
Station No. 2612
Stark Star
St. Louis
Telegraph
Thompson No. 5
Thompson No. 7
Ulster Prolific
Vergennes
Victoria
Waupanuka
White Diamond
White Delaware
Wilder
Woodruff Red
Wordon
Wyoming Red


_Pears_

Admiral Cecil
America
Angelique le Clerc
Angouleme
Angouleme Bronzee
Anjou
Ansault
Antoine Lormier
Arbre Courbe
Auguste Royer
Bartlett
Baylor
Bergamot Buffo
Bergamot Easter
Bergamot Heitrich
Bergamot Royal d'Hiver
Beurre Alex Lucas
Beurre d'Aremburg
Beurre Bosc
Beurre Benoist Noveaux
Beurre Capiaumont
Beurre Diel
Beurre Dumont
Beurre gris d'Hiver
Beurre Mauxion
Beurre Noire
Bezi de la Motte
Black Worcester
Bonchretian Vermont
Boussock
Brockworth Park
B. S. Fox
Buffum
Cabot
Canandaigua
Catherine Gardette
Catinka
Chapman
Church
Clairgeau
Clapp's Favorite
Columbia
Col. Wilder
Comet
Cornice
Comte de Lamy
Comte de Paris
Conseiller de la Cour
Delices d'Huy
Delices de Mons
De Lamartine
Desiree Cornelis
Dix
Dorset
Dow
Doyenne d'Alencon
Doyenne Boussock
Doyenne Dillon
Doyenne Gray
Doyenne Jamain
Doyenne Robin
Doyenne Sieulle
Dr. Nelis
Duchesse
Duchesse de Bordeaux
Duchesse Precoce
Duhamel du Monceau
Eastern Belle
Easter Beurre
Edmunds
Emile d'Heyst
Figue d'Alencon
Figue de Naples
Flemish Beauty
Fred Clapp
Gansel's Bergamot
Gansel's Seckel
Garber
Hardy
Homewood
Hoosic
Howell
Island
Jackson
Jalousie de Fontenay
Japanese
Jones
Josephine
Kieffer
Kingsessing
Kirtland
Knight's Seedling
Lady Clapp
La France
Langalier
Lawrence
Le Comte
Lodge
Louise Bonne de Jersey
Loveaux
Lucy Duke
Mace
Magnate
Miller
Minister Dr. Lucius
Mount Vernon
Mme. Blanche Sannier
Mme. Treyve
Napoleon
Oswego Beurre
Pardee's Seedling
Passe Crassane
Pater Noster
Paul Ambre
P. Barry
Pierre Corneille
Pitmaston Duchesse
Poir Louise
Pound
President Gilbert
Prince Consort
Princes St. Germain
Rapalje's Seedling
Raymond de Montlaux
Reeder
Refreshing
Rousselet Bivort
Rutter
Sarah
Sekel
Secretaire Rodine
Serrurier
Sheldon
Soulard Bergamot
Souv. d'Esper
Souv. de Lens
Souv. de la Marcau Trou
Souv. de la Reine des Belges
Souv. Sannier Pere
St. Andre
Sterling
Superfin
Tyson
Urbaniste
Van Buren
Vermont Beauty
Vergalieu
Vergalieu No. 4
Washington
White Doyenne
Winter Nelis
Worden Seckel


_Plums_

Abundance
America
Apple
Arch Duke
Arkansas Lombard
Autumn Comport
Bailey
Baker
Baray's Green Gage
Bartlett
Belgian Purple
Berger
Blue Damson
Bradshaw
Burbank
Cabot
Chabot
Climax
Clingstein
Coe's Golden Drop
Coe's Late Red
Coe's Purple Drop
Combination
Copper
Dame Aubert
De Caradenec
Delaware
Diamond
Duane Purple
Eagle
Early Orange Prune
Engre
French Prune
Freestone Damson
Frost Damson
Field
General Hand
Geuii
Giant Prune
Gold
Gold Drop
Goliath
G. No. 44 Jones
Grand Duke
Grant Prune
Geuthrie Late
Hale
Harriet
Hector
Hiederman Sand Cherry
Hudson River Purple Egg
Imperial Gage
Italian Prune
Japanese Seedling
Jefferson
Juicy
King of Damson
Kirk
Late Black Orleans
Lombard
Mariana
Maru
Mary
McLaughlin
Merunka
Middleburgh
Mikado
Miles
Mogul
Monarch
Monroe
Newman
Niagara
Normand
Ocheeda
Octi Smomo
October Purple
Orient
Oullin Golden
Pacific
Palatine
Paragon
Palmer's Favorite
Pearl
Pond's Seedling
Poole's Pride
Pottowatamie
Pringle Blue
Pringle Purple
Prunus Simoni
Quackenboss
Red June
Red Negate
Reine Claude
Robe de Sargent
Royal Hative
Saratoga
Satsuma
Saunders
Shipper
Shipper's Pride
Shiro
Shropshire
Shropshire Damson
Smith's Late Blue
Spalding
Stanton
Stanton's Seedling
St. Lawrence
Sweet Botan
Tragedy Prune
Transparent
Tennant Prune
Uchi Beni
Ungarrish Prune
Union Purple
Victoria
Washington
Wickson
Wild Goose
White Japan
White Kelsey
White Nicholas
World Beater
Yeddo
Yellow Egg
Yellow Gage
Yosebe


_Cherries_

Abesse d'Oignies
Bay State
Black Tartarian
Centennial
Downer's Late
Double Nattie
Dyehouse
Early Purple Guigne
Elton
Esel Kirsche
Governor Wood
Hole
Ida
King's Amarelle
Knight's Early Red
Large Montmorency
Luelling
May Duke
Mercer
Mezel
Montmorency
Napoleon
Olivet
Orel No. 23
Rapp
Reine Hortense
Rockport Bigarreau
Sparhawk's Honey
Transcendant
Windsor
Yellow Spanish


_Currants_

Perfection
Black Champion
Filler
President Wilder


_Peaches_

Carman
Champion
Crosby
Elberta
Greensboro
Hill's Chili
Horton River
Kalamazoo
Late Crawford
Lemon Cling
Old Mixon
Stevens' Rare Ripe
Waddell
Willet

_Quinces_

Champion
Japanese
Orange
Pink Japan
Red Japan
Rea's Mammoth
Sweet Winter
White Japan

[Illustration: VIEWING THE GUNS]



CHAPTER XIII

Forest, Fish and Game Exhibit and Schedule of Awards


FOREST, FISH AND GAME EXHIBIT

BY A. B. STROUGH

Special Agent of the Forest, Fish and Game Commission, State of New York


The State exhibit in the Forest Fish and Game Department was prepared
and installed by the Forest, Fish and Game Commission, with funds
furnished by the Louisiana Purchase Exposition Commission of the State
of New York.


A SPORTSMAN'S CAMP

A modern sportsman's camp of rustic design, fourteen feet by seventeen
feet in size, was constructed and furnished after the general style and
appearance of the usual summer residence in the Adirondack mountains.
The contractor for the erection of this camp was the firm of Messrs. D.
B. & D. F. Sperry, of Old Forge, N. Y. Mr. D. F. Sperry, "Frank," as he
is known to visitors to the Adirondacks, had personal charge of the
construction and was something of an exhibit himself. Being a lifelong
Adirondack guide, and having been employed by many prominent people,
among others, ex-President Harrison, any rustic work from his hand was
sure to attract attention.

It was unfortunate that it was impossible to have him, or some other
Adirondack guide, in attendance at the "camp" all through the season, as
many visitors wished to see and talk with some such person. Some of
them, seeing the Sperry name-plate on the end of a log of the camp,
inquired for "Frank," expecting to find him in attendance. He has had
many inquiries from people residing at widely separated places in
various parts of the country, for duplicates of the camp exhibit, or for
some other design of rustic building.


CONSTRUCTION OF THE CAMP

The camp was constructed of Adirondack spruce logs and the chimney was
of the same external construction. The roof was covered with spruce
bark. All the material showing inside the camp was, as far as possible,
left in natural condition, the logs with the bark on, and the underside
of the roof boards unplaned, showing the coarse saw marks.

Innumerable inquiries were made by interested visitors, particularly
those coming from the southern and western States, as to the species of
timber used in constructing the camp. When informed that the logs were
of spruce much interest was shown. Many had never seen spruce before.


THE FURNITURE

A part of the furniture was built by Mr. Sperry, and the remainder by
another Adirondack guide, Mr. E. E. Sumner, of Saranac Lake, N. Y. Mr.
Sperry made the bedstead, the window settee and the center table, after
a style that is common in the Adirondack camps. The woodwork was of
spruce, turned smooth and stained a light smoke color to give it a
finished appearance. Mr. Sumner constructed the other furniture in the
best rustic style, the framework being of white cedar with the bark on,
and the bottoms of the chairs and settees of white birch bark. Both of
these guides have had many inquiries for duplicates of their handiwork
as exhibited. The "atmosphere" of the camp was that of everyday life in
the forest. The bed was "made up" as though the owner was expected to
occupy it at night. Garments and articles that had seen service, such as
a leather hunting jacket, a gun case, "pack" baskets, fish reels and
snow shoes were hung on the walls in proper places.


ATTRACTIVE FEATURES

The mantel and fireplace particularly attracted attention. The mantel
was of spruce with the bark on, and the fireplace was constructed with a
stone facing and lining, showing andirons and birch logs in place as in
actual use. In one corner there was shelving for bric-a-brac, fishing
tackle, ammunition, etc., constructed by utilizing a discarded fishing
boat, cutting the same across the center into two parts and placing
shelves at convenient intervals, fastening the same on the ribs of the
boat.

In another corner was a swing table that could be hung up against the
wall when not in use. On the mantel were placed articles of rustic work
that harmonized with the surroundings--a rustic clock, wooden pipes and
smoking set to match, a stein and mug of wood, together with other
articles of ornament and utility. A piece of library shelving of unique
design and special construction was provided and furnished with standard
publications on fish, birds and animals, and stories of life in the
forest and of the chase. Thirty books were shown, a number of which were
kindly furnished by Messrs. Doubleday, Page & Co., of New York city. On
the center table were kept the current numbers of the leading sporting
magazines, both weekly and monthly.


WALL DECORATIONS

The walls were decorated with bright colored Indian blankets, flags and
souvenir paddles, on which were painted various national flags and
camping scenes. The paddles being of a very white spruce and the
background being the spruce logs of the camp with dark colored bark, the
effect was pleasing and attracted much attention.

An interesting and valuable feature of the furnishing and decoration of
the camp, and, incidentally, souvenirs of the chase, were a large fine
moose head over the mantel, an elk's head on the gable outside, bucks'
heads at the sides of the porch in front of the camp, and the furs of
red foxes, deer and black bear. Some of the furs were specially prepared
for rugs and placed on the floor of the camp, giving the interior an air
of comfort and cheerfulness.


HUNTING AND FISHING OUTFIT

The hunting and fishing outfit consisted of two repeating rifles, one a
Savage and the other a Winchester, a double-barreled shotgun, three
fishing rods, one each of steel, split lancewood and split bamboo, and a
collection which included trout flies, landing nets, minnow pail, reels,
lines, cartridge belt, loading set and other paraphernalia. A guide-boat
of the latest style and of superior workmanship was a part of the
sportsman's outfit. This boat was kindly loaned by the manufacturer, Mr.
Fred W. Rice, formerly of Saranac Lake, N. Y., but now living at
Seattle, Wash. His son continues the manufacture of guide-boats at Lake
Placid, N. Y.


BALSAM PILLOWS

On the settee and bed in the camp were a number of balsam pillows. A
large and particularly fine one came from the Higby camp on Big Moose
lake in the Adirondacks. It was made by Miss Lila Daisy Higby, a little
lady only seven years of age, whose needlework decorating the cover
showed artistic ability of great merit for one so young. Many visitors
admired it, and some of them have written her in complimentary terms.

The odor from these pillows filled the camp, and instantly attracted the
attention of visitors. One of the questions usually asked first of the
attendant was where the perfume came from and what it was. Some supposed
it to be from the logs of which the camp was constructed. Many visitors
wanted to know where they could obtain such pillows. Those purchased for
the camp came from Mr. A. M. Church, Boonville, N. Y., who also
furnished the gun rack so much admired, and also the fur rugs.


FIRE NOTICE

On the side of the camp in a conspicuous place was posted a fire notice
such as may be found in thousands of places along the trail throughout
the Adirondacks and Catskills. Visitors that had been through our
mountains recognized this feature instantly, for these notices may be
found at all the hotels and public places, and also on a great many of
the private camps. This little placard printed on cloth attracted much
attention. It contains our forest fire rules and much of the law
relative to woodland fires. Many persons interested in forestry, many of
them from foreign countries, copied the notice verbatim. It is probable
that similar rules and regulations will be incorporated in the forestry
laws of other states and countries.

An attendant was employed at the camp who answered the numerous
questions as to where the various articles of furniture and decoration
might be obtained. Much information was also sought by visitors in
relation to the Adirondack forests and the summer resorts of New York in
general.

This sportsman's camp was the only exhibit of the kind shown at the
Fair. Sportsmen and lovers of life in the woods from all parts of the
land visited it; many were ecstatic in its praises; some complimented it
by saying it was the most artistic feature of the whole forestry, fish
and game exhibit. It was photographed perhaps more than one hundred
times during the season and in one instance by nine different persons on
a single day.


ANIMALS AND BIRDS

The fur and game animals and birds of the State were represented by
mounted specimens prepared by professional taxidermists. In many
instances they were shown in pairs, male and female.

The space in front of the camp and also at one side was inclosed by a
rustic fence built of round spruce. In the yard at the side was placed a
tree about twelve feet high, and under it was prepared an artificial
ground work in imitation of a woodland area after a recent snow storm.
In and about this tree, and forming a part of the picture, were placed
in position, as true to life and natural conditions as possible,
specimens of practically all of the birds that remain with us during the
winter season, as follows:

Bald Eagle
Golden Eagle
Osprey
Red-tailed Hawk
Cooper Hawk
Marsh Hawk
Ruffed Grouse
Spruce Grouse
Quail
Kingfisher
Three-toed Woodpecker
Pileated Woodpecker
Goshawk
Red-shouldered Hawk
Sharp-shinned Hawk
Broad-winged Hawk
Rough-legged Hawk
Duck Hawk,
Gray Gyrfalcon
Snow Owl
Barred Owl
Great-horned Owl
Long-eared Owl
Short-eared Owl
Acadian Owl
Screech Owl
Great Gray Owl
Hawk Owl
Barn Owl
Richardson Owl
Hairy Woodpecker
Downy Woodpecker
Flicker
Pine Grosbeak
Red-winged Crossbill
White-winged Crossbill
Redpoll
Blue Jay
Horned Lark
Lapland Longspur
English Sparrow
Winter Wren
Chickadee
Northern Shrike
Snowflake
Moose Bird
Raven
Crow


SONG AND PERCHING BIRDS

In and about another tree placed in front of the camp were shown
practically all of the song and perching birds of the State other than
the ones shown in the winter scene at the side of the camp. The birds in
this collection were as follows:

Cardinal
Summer Tanager
Scarlet Tanager
Yellow-billed Cuckoo
Black-billed Cuckoo
Red-headed Woodpecker
Red-bellied Woodpecker
Yellow-bellied Sapsucker
King Bird
Cat Bird
Towhee
Robin
Meadow Lark
Prairie Horned Lark
Baltimore Oriole
Orchard Oriole
Whip-poor-will
Night Hawk
Pigeon Hawk
Sparrow Hawk
Mourning Dove
Rose-breasted Grosbeak
Evening Grosbeak
Purple Finch
Red-winged Blackbird
Rusty Blackbird
Bobolink
Mocking Bird
Starling
Purple Grackle
Humming Bird
Yellow-breasted Chat
Blue-gray Gnatcatcher
Tufted Titmouse
Brown Creeper
House Wren
Marsh Wren
Brown Thrasher
Wood Thrush
Hermit Thrush
Wilson Thrush
Water Thrush
Chimney Swift
Bank Swallow
Rough-winged Swallow
Cliff Swallow
Barn Swallow
Song Sparrow
Tree Sparrow
Blue Bird
Indigo Bunting
Ruby-crowned Kinglet
Golden-crowned Kinglet
Oven Bird
Yellow Throat
Goldfinch
Bohemian Waxwing
Cedar Waxwing
Phoebe
Wood Pewee
White-eyed Vireo
Blue-headed Vireo
Yellow-throated Vireo
Warbling Vireo
Black and White Warbler
Worm-eating Warbler
Myrtle Warbler
Prairie Warbler
Palm Warbler
Tennessee Warbler
Black-throated Blue Warbler
Cerulean Warbler
Prothonotary Warbler
Blackburnian Warbler
Black-throated Green Warbler
Hooded Warbler
Golden-winged Warbler
Connecticut Warbler
Mourning Warbler
Canadian Warbler
Blue-winged Warbler
Chipping Sparrow
Field Sparrow
Swamp Sparrow
Ipswich Sparrow
White-crowned Sparrow
Olive-sided Flycatcher
Yellow-bellied Flycatcher
Loggerhead Shrike
Purple Martin
Cow Bird
Pine Warbler
Kentucky Warbler
Nashville Warbler
Parula Warbler
Cape May Warbler
Yellow Warbler
Black-poll Warbler
Red-breasted Nuthatch
Brown-headed Nuthatch


GAME BIRDS

In cabinets within an inclosure near the camp were shown our game birds,
such as the web-footed wild fowl and shore birds which may be hunted,
grouse, marsh birds or waders, and water or sea birds, as follows:


_Wild Ducks and Geese_

American Merganser
Red-breasted Merganser
Hooded Merganser
Mallard
Pintail
Black Duck
Widgeon
Green-winged Teal
Blue-winged Teal
Shoveler
Wood Duck
Redhead
Canvas-back
Broadbill
Lesser Scaup Duck
Whistler
Buffle-head
Ruddy Duck
Old Squaw
Harlequin
American Eider
King Eider
Black Coot
Sea Coot
White-winged Scoter
Canada Goose
Greater Snow Goose
Blue Goose
White-fronted Goose
Brant
Whistling Swan


_Shore Birds_

Woodcock
Wilson Snipe
Upland Plover
Black-bellied Plover
Golden Plover
Semi-palmated Plover
Belted Piping Plover
Wilson Plover
Piping Plover
Killdeer
Willett
Greater Yellow Legs
Summer Yellow Legs
Turnstone
Red Phalarope
Northern Phalarope
Avocet
Oyster Catcher
Long-billed Curlew
Jack Curlew
Hudsonian Godwit
Sanderling
Black-necked Stilt
Dowitcher
Knot
Stilt Sandpiper
Solitary Sandpiper
Spotted Sandpiper
Red-backed Sandpiper
White-rumped Sandpiper
Least Sandpiper
Buff-breasted Sandpiper


_Grouse, etc._


Ruffed Grouse
Quail
Spruce Grouse
Mongolian Pheasant
English Pheasant


_Marsh Birds or Waders_

Great Blue Heron
Little Green Heron
Black-crowned Night Heron
Yellow-crowned Night Heron
Egret
Brown Pelican
Bittern
King Rail
Virginia Rail
Yellow Rail
Clapper Rail
Carolina Rail
Little Black Rail
Florida Gallinule
Mud Hen


_Water or Sea Birds_

Loon
Black-throated Loon
Red-throated Loon
Horned Grebe
Holboel Grebe
Pied-billed Grebe
Puffin
Dovekie
Cormorant
Double-crested Cormorant
Black Guillemot
Brunnich Murre
Paresitic [*sic] Jaegar
Kittiwake
Gannet
Black Skimmer
Sooty Shearwater
Great Black-backed Gull
Ring-billed Gull
Claucus Gull
Herring Gull
Laughing Gull
Bonapart Gull
Black Tern
Gull-billed Tern
Wilson Tern
Roseate Tern
Least Tern
Black-capped Petrel
Leach Petrel
Wilson Petrel


FUR AND GAME ANIMALS

All of our fur and game animals were represented as follows:

White-tail or Virginia Deer
Black Bear
Lynx
Wild Cat
Red Fox
Gray Fox
Beaver
Raccoon
Skunk
Otter
Fisher
Cottontail Rabbit
Martin
Mink
Black Squirrel
Gray Squirrel
Red Squirrel
Fox Squirrel
Flying Squirrel
Chipmunk
Musk Rat
Opossum
Varying Hare
Porcupine

Our deer were represented by a fine buck, a doe mounted in a reclining
position, and a small white doe. Arranged among bushes in the snow scene
at the side of the camp this family was most lifelike and pleasing in
appearance. White deer are very unusual, but not unnatural. One of them
is killed in this State about every two years.

Moose and elk are introduced animals with us now, and, as it is illegal
to kill any, life size specimens could not well be shown. However, very
good heads were exhibited as a part of the decoration of the camp.
Albinos of muskrat and porcupine were exhibited. Such freakish specimens
attract more attention than those of usual growth.


RARE SPECIES

In addition to the animals scheduled above were specimens of some
species that are probably extinct in the Adirondacks, viz., a gray wolf
and a panther. The gray wolf was an excellent specimen loaned by General
E. A. McAlpin, of New York city. It was killed about eight years ago on
his preserve in the northern part of Hamilton county, and none have been
seen since. The panther was killed about twenty-eight years ago by Hon.
Verplanck Colvin in the southern part of Hamilton county, and is the
last one heard of in the State of New York. The black bear was an
unusually fine specimen, killed in Sullivan county. It was mounted to
order by Mr. Fred Sauter, of New York city, for this exhibit, and
without doubt was the best representative of this species at the Fair.
Experts in the art of taxidermy and naturalists were enthusiastic in its
praise.

The great blue heron was loaned by Mr. Grant E. Winchester, of Saranac
Inn. It was a very good specimen and was mounted by Mr. H. H. Miner, of
Saranac Lake, N. Y.

The animals were placed about the camp under the trees in connection
with the collection of birds in positions as true to life as possible in
the available space, making a picture of woodland life delightful to the
eye and interesting to every person that visited the Palace of Forestry,
Fish and Game.


FISH

The fish exhibit consisted of eighty-six mounted specimens, representing
seventy-two species, most of them prepared specially for this display by
the best workmen in the country. Substantially all the food and game
fish were shown. In preparing this collection no attempt, with one
exception, was made to show abnormally large specimens. The intention
was to show the average fish true to life in color, size and contour.
Both fresh and salt water species were represented. The collection,
which is undoubtedly the best in the country, comprised the following
species:

Sea Lamphrey
Common Sturgeon
Short-nosed Sturgeon
Horned Pout
Long-nose Sucker
Common Sucker
Hog Sucker
Golden Sucker
Fallfish
Carp
Eel
Sea Herring
Hickory Shad
Frostfish
Common Whitefish
Smelt
Tullibee
Atlantic Salmon
Red-throat Trout
Brown Trout
Rainbow Trout
Lake Trout
Brook Trout
Grayling
Pickerel
Northern Pike
Shad
Menhaden
Spanish Mackerel
Pompano
Bluefish
Crappie
Calico Bass
Rock Bass
Sunfish
Small-mouth Black Bass
Large-mouth Black Bass
Wall-eyed Pike
Weakfish
Red Drum
Kingfish
Tautog
Rosefish
Tomcod
Haddock
Ling
Cusk
Summer Flounder
Flatfish
Muscallonge
Northern Muscallonge
Striped Mullet
Common Mackerel
Bonito
Sauger
Yellow Perch
White Bass
Striped Bass
White Perch
Sea Bass
Scup
Spotted Weakfish
Croaker
Bergall
Spadefish
Whiting
Cod
Burbot
Hake
Halibut
Sand Dab
Gar Pike


In addition to the above-mentioned specimens there was shown an
interesting collection of shell fish, including different varieties of
oysters, together with the enemies of the same, such as the drill and
starfish. A number of exhibits showing curiosities of oyster growth were
in this collection.

The fish were displayed in six cabinets constructed to order for the
exhibit. They were lined with black plush, thus forming a strong
contrast with the colors of the various pieces.

The land-locked salmon mentioned above is one of the finest pieces
extant, not only in relation to size but also in the mounting of the
same. It is owned by Hon. J. P. Allds, Norwich, N. Y., and was kindly
loaned by him for this exhibit.

A great northern pike that weighed twenty-five pounds when caught was in
the collection. It was loaned by Mr. Ferris J Meigs, of New York city,
and was caught in Follensbee pond, in the Adirondacks, by Miss Juliet
Wilbur Tompkins in 1902. This is the largest pike, sometimes erroneously
called pickerel, within the knowledge of the Forest, Fish and Game
Commission.


GENERAL NOMENCLATURE

All the specimens of animals, birds and fish were properly and uniformly
labeled, giving the names the various species are generally known by,
and also the scientific nomenclature adopted by naturalists. The
importance of this matter of nomenclature was demonstrated very early
during the Fair. The song birds being very small no labels were placed
upon them at first, as the labels were in some instances larger than the
birds. The fact that visitors examining the specimens would often search
for the attendant in order to obtain information as to the names of the
different birds exhibited proved the necessity of clearly labeling all
specimens. On the other hand there seemed to be a general
misunderstanding as to some species of fish, various names being applied
to the same species. Visitors were constantly requesting information on
these points. The northern pike are by many people called pickerel and
sometimes when in water with pickerel are mistaken for muscallonge. The
distinguishing marks were frequently explained to interested visitors.


FORESTRY

One of the most scientific and practical features of the New York
exhibit was that made by the Forestry department. It was prepared to
show the method by which the Forestry Commission is reforesting large
areas of State land that have been denuded by repeated fires.


A FOREST NURSERY

The most important part of this was a fully appointed forest nursery,
located out of doors close to the northeast corner of the Forest, Fish
and Game building. Its neat rustic fence, made of white cedar poles,
enclosed an area Of 7,200 square feet (120 feet long by 60 wide) and
contained about 80,000 little trees alive and green. The soil being of
heavy clay, it was covered to the depth of six inches with good loam
before any seeds were sown.

About one-third of the nursery was arranged in beds each sixteen feet
long by four feet wide with paths three feet in width. In two of these
beds seeds were sown of Scotch pine, Norway spruce, hardy catalpa and
American elm, half a bed being given to each species. The seeds were
sown about the first of May. They germinated well, and the little trees
grew thriftily, the catalpa reaching a height of eighteen inches before
the Fair closed. A bed of Norway pine showed the plants on half the bed
crowded together in a thick mat as if grown from seed sown broadcast; on
the other half arranged as if from seed sown in rows across the bed,
both methods of sowing seed being followed in actual practice. Four beds
were given to two-year-old plants--Norway spruce, white pine, European
larch and Scotch pine. These were also arranged as if grown from seed
sown broadcast.

These beds, excepting the seed bed for broad-leaf species, were all
shaded with neat screens made of lath to shelter the tender plants from
the hot rays of the southern sun.

In actual nursery work, after conifers have remained in the seed bed for
two years, they are transplanted into other beds, being spaced four or
five inches apart, where they remain for two or three years more before
they are placed finally in the forest. Six beds were devoted to showing
this feature of nursery work. For this purpose four-year-old plants were
used, of the following species Norway pine, Norway spruce, white spruce,
white pine, European larch and Scotch pine.

A sample plantation which occupied nearly half the nursery showed how
the plants are, in actual practice, placed in the forest. White pine,
Norway spruce and Scotch pine were the species used. These were about
three feet high and were spaced about four feet apart.

To show how the broad-leaf species are raised for shade trees, for
planting along the highways of the State, for farmers' wood lots, for
sugar groves and hardwood forests, ten drills, stretching entirely
across the nursery between the beds and the sample plantation, were
planted with scarlet oak, red oak, honey locust, hard or sugar maple,
red or soft maple, basswood, white ash, black walnut and hardy catalpa,
a row being given to each species. These were one year old and were
spaced about six inches apart.

The names of the species were printed plainly on neat board labels ten
inches long by five inches broad. The nursery was kept free from weeds,
and was watered each evening during a long drought which began about the
first of September and continued till the Fair closed.

Thousands of people visited the nursery, attracted to it not only by the
beauty of the small green trees arranged in such interesting manner, but
also because of the instruction it afforded in the science of forestry.
Foresters, botanists, seedsmen, and others interested in trees in a
scientific or practical way, many of whom were from abroad, gave the
nursery close scrutiny.

The forester in charge who prepared the nursery, Mr. A. Knechtel,
B.S.F.E., of Albany, N. Y., was kept constantly busy answering the
numerous questions not only concerning the exhibit, but also in regard
to the important work being done by the Forestry Department in restoring
the forests upon the denuded non-agricultural lands of the State.

In a corner of the nursery stood two interesting cross-sections of white
pine and white spruce, twenty-three inches and sixteen inches in
diameter respectively, each having forty annual rings plainly visible,
showing that in forty years, under favorable conditions, trees of these
species can be grown from seed to the given diameters.


FORESTRY TOOLS AND INSTRUMENTS

Within the building were exhibited thirty-nine instruments and tools
used in forestry practice, a collection of the seeds of eighty-four
native forest trees of the State, and the photographs of eighty of our
more important trees showing the same in leaf and in winter. In
connection with each pair of photographs was a life size illustration of
the bark of the tree, together with specimens of the leaf, flower and
fruit.


INSECTS AFFECTING FOREST AND SHADE TREES

The exhibit of insects affecting forest and shade trees was prepared by
E. P. Felt, D.Sc., New York State Entomologist, and was a small, though
representative collection, designed to show the life, history and habits
in particular of the more injurious forms of insects affecting shade and
forest trees in New York State. A special effort was made to depict, so
far as possible, the life, history, habits and methods of work of the
forms possessing economic importance and to show whenever possible the
natural enemies of value in keeping these species in control. This
collection was arranged in a specially designed case having a series of
three nearly horizontal trays thirty-seven and one-half inches by
eighteen and one-half inches upon each side, and an elevated central
portion bearing two nearly perpendicular ones upon each side, the middle
being occupied by a glass case containing an attractive natural group. A
brief account of the exhibit under appropriate heads is as follows:

_Insect galls_. This collection, occupying two nearly perpendicular
trays and representing the work of fifty-three species, was devoted to
the peculiar and varied vegetable deformities produced by insects. These
structures are always of great popular interest, and the insects causing
the same present biologic problems of unusual attractiveness.

_Forest insects_. The species affecting forest trees in particular
were exhibited in three horizontal trays occupying one side of the case.
This section was devoted principally to representing the biology and
methods of work of this exceedingly important group.

_Shade-tree insects_. Like that representing forest insects, the
exhibit of shade-tree pests was very largely biologic. It occupied three
horizontal trays and a nearly vertical one of the exhibit case, and was
devoted to species which are destructive largely on account of their
depredations upon shade trees.

_Adirondack insects_. This was a small collection occupying one of
the nearly perpendicular trays, and comprised over one hundred species.
This portion of the exhibit represented the more characteristic forms
occurring in the Adirondacks.

_Natural group of forest insects_. This group occupied the central
glass box and contained thirty-one species of insects or representations
of their work upon wax models of their food plants, namely, white birch,
red oak, elm and maple. Eleven species of beetles, fifteen of
butterflies and moths, two of the bee family and three of the bug family
were to be seen upon the plants or on the ground at their base. This
group gave an excellent idea of the appearance of insects when amid
their natural surroundings.


COLORED PLATES

A series of quarto and octavo colored plates illustrating the work and
various stages of some of the more important depredators upon forest and
shade trees, was exhibited in two double-faced frames attached to the
top of this case. The more important insects included in this group were
the following: Sugar maple borer, elm snout beetles, twig girdler or
twig pruner, white marked tussock moth, gypsy moth, brown tail moth, bag
worm, forest tent caterpillar, elm leaf beetle, oyster scale, scurfy
bark louse, San Jose scale, elm bark louse, cottony maple scale. One
plate was devoted to characteristic insects affecting oak, and another
to those depredating upon hard pine.


SPECIMENS OF NATIVE WOODS

The forest product of the State was represented by a collection of
specimens of all the native woods of New York, built into panel work,
showing both sides. Each species was represented by two specimens and
each of the four surfaces was finished in a different manner. One
surface was highly polished, one oiled, one planed and one rough.
Ninety-one species of native and nine species of introduced woods were
exhibited in this manner. Displaying the several species in four
different ways enabled the discriminating observer to study and compare
the various woods profitably. The manner of labeling was greatly
appreciated. Some students copied all the labels, each spending many
hours on this task.

The kinds of timber that grow in this State from which a five-inch board
can be sawed and which were represented as described, are as follows:

Cucumber Tree
Tulip Tree
Basswood
Linden
Holly
Striped Maple
Hard Maple
Silver Maple
Red Maple
Box Elder
Staghorn Sumach
Kentucky Coffee Tree
Honey Locust
Red or Canada Plum
Wild Plum
Green Ash
Sassafras
American Elm
Rock Elm
Slippery Elm
Wild Red Cherry
Wild Black Cherry
Wild Crab Apple
Mountain Ash
Cockspur Thorn
Black Haw
Scarlet Fruited Thorn
Shad Bush
Witch Hazel
Sweet Gum
Flowering Dogwood
Pepperidge
Persimmon
Black Ash
White Ash
Red Ash
Scarlet Oak
Black Oak
Pin Oak
Jack Oak
Hackberry
Red Mulberry
Sycamore
Butternut
Black Walnut
Bitternut
Shagbark Hickory
Mockernut Hickory
Pignut Hickory
King Nut Hickory
Small Fruited Hickory
White Oak
Post Oak
Burr Oak
Chestnut Oak
Chinquapin Oak
Yellow Oak
Swamp White Oak
Red Oak
White Pine
Red Pine
Pitch Pine
Jersey Pine
Yellow Pine
Jack Pine
Tamarack
White Poplar
Crack Willow
Weeping Willow
Lalanthus
Chestnut
Beech
Ironwood
Blue Beech
Black Birch
Yellow Birch
White Birch
Red Birch
Canoe Birch
Yellow Willow
Black Willow
Peach Willow
Aspen
Large Toothed Poplar
Swamp Cottonwood
Balm of Gilead
Cottonwood
Red Cedar
White Cedar
Arbor Vitae
Black Spruce
Red Spruce
White Spruce
Hemlock
Balsam
Lombardy Poplar
Wild Apple
Yellow Locust
Horse Chestnut
Blue Willow

These specimens of wood were built into panel work in seven frames of
the following seven species of wood, respectively:

Maple
Cherry
Chestnut
Rock Elm
White Oak
Black Ash
Black Birch


LABELING OF SPECIMENS

Each specimen was labeled on both sides, with the common or popular name
and also the botanical name. Most of the pieces were from a collection
that the Commission exhibited at the Paris Exposition in 1900, which was
there awarded a gold medal. In preparing the exhibit the collection was
enlarged so as to represent all our native woods, and built into new
frame work of substantial and attractive design.


WOOD PULP

A complete collection of the several kinds of wood pulp manufactured in
New York was also a part of the exhibit, as follows:

Ground Spruce pulp
Sulphite Spruce pulp
Sulphite Balsam pulp
Sulphite Poplar pulp
Sulphite Basswood pulp
Pulverized Pine pulp
Pulverized Poplar pulp

Ground and sulphite pulp is used in the manufacture of paper and many
household articles of utility. Pulverized pulp is used in making
linoleum and dynamite.

Although wood pulp was shown in some other exhibits, no one else made
any attempt to show a complete collection of all the various kinds of
pulp manufactured.

Articles of utility made of pulp, such as wash tubs, pails, measures,
cups, pitchers, etc., fifty-three pieces in all, were shown in
connection with the display of pulp.


BY-PRODUCTS OF THE FOREST

By-products of the forest were also displayed on a piece of circular
shelving with a suitable caption. The articles in this collection were
as follows:

Crude wood alcohol
Refined wood alcohol
Columbian spirits
Acetic acid
Refined acetic acid
Glacial acetic acid
Acetate of lime
Gray acetate of lime
Pine needle extract
Light wood tar
Heavy wood tar
Creosote
Tannic acid
Pine pitch
Spruce gum (raw)
Refined spruce gum
Basswood honey
Black walnuts
Wood ashes
Charcoal
Chestnuts
Hickory nuts
Beechnuts
Hazel nuts
Maple sugar (cakes)
Maple lozenges
Maple kisses
Maple sugar (pulverized)
Maple syrup
Mocker nuts
Butter nuts
Sassafras
Witch hazel

There was no other exhibit of this nature at the Fair.


SUMMER RESORTS

On one side of the space occupied by the exhibit was a high wall which
was covered with green burlap. On this wall were three groups of large
photographs, one of the Thousand Islands, one of Adirondack and one of
Catskill scenery.

In the Thousand Island group in addition to a collection of typical
island scenery, was a large picture of the Thousand Island House at
Alexandria Bay, N. Y., furnished by the owner, O. G. Staples; a picture
of the Hotel Frontenac on Round Island loaned by the owner, and a very
large colored picture of the excursion steamer "Ramona," on tour through
the islands, loaned by the Thousand Island Steamboat Company, Cape
Vincent, N. Y.

The Catskill pictures consisted of photographs of mountain scenery and
waterfalls, prepared specially for this exhibit. A fine group of scenes
was furnished by the Catskill Mountain Railroad of Catskill, N. Y.,
showing the Otis Elevated road, the Mountain House, etc.

The group of Adirondack views contained pictures of a number of the
largest hotels in that region, and collections of mountain and water
scenery. One group was of Lake George scenery. A large picture of
Wawbeek Hotel, on Upper Saranac Lake, was furnished by J. Ben Hart, of
Wawbeek, N. Y. The Delaware and Hudson Railroad Company kindly loaned a
large panoramic picture of Lake Placid and mountains of that locality.

Many of these pictures were in colors. They were appreciated by a great
number of people that had visited the several summer resorts
represented.


AN OPEN HUNTING CAMP

A model of a hunting camp of the open style, of which there are many in
the Adirondacks, was displayed. It was constructed of spruce with the
bark on, and the floor was covered with balsam boughs, which exhaled a
delightful odor noticeable several yards from the camp.

A large rustic table made of a cross section of a cedar tree with the
roots of a tree for the standard and legs of the table, was loaned by
Mr. Ferris J. Meigs, of Tupper Lake, N. Y. The tree from which the cross
section was taken showed by its growth of rings that it was more than
four hundred years old.


DETAILS OF EXPENDITURE

For the purpose of making this State Forestry, Fish and Game exhibit,
the Louisiana Purchase Exposition Commission generously set aside the
sum of $18,000. Being unable to secure as much space as was needed, and
for the additional reason that the salaries of some of the persons
collaborating on the exhibit were provided for in another manner, it was
not necessary to use all of the funds available.

Dividing the disbursements into ten representative accounts, the amount
expended was as follows:
Animals and birds -------------------------   $2,211 56
    Fish ----------------------------------    1,792 51
    Insects -------------------------------      644 52
    Plants for nursery, etc. --------------      392 69
    Woods, instruments, by-products, etc. -    1,119 28
    Sportsman's Camp and furnishings ------    1,507 92
    Wall pictures -------------------------      278 93
    Freight and express -------------------      697 10
    Installation --------------------------    2,481 76
    Maintenance and repacking -------------    3,717 81
                                           ------------
Total -------------------------------------  $14,844 08
                                           ------------

Had the exhibit been prepared without recourse to materials on hand and
by a separate force paid from the funds of the Louisiana Purchase
Exposition Commission it would have undoubtedly cost the State not less
than $20,000, but the fact that considerable material was available from
former exhibits, and from the office of the Forest, Fish and Game
Commission, and the further fact, as above stated, that some of the
collaborators received their compensation from the funds of that
Commission, enabled the State to make the elaborate and exhaustive
exhibit that it did in this department at the figures shown above.


THE ROSTER

The exhibit was prepared under the direction of Colonel William F. Fox,
Superintendent State Forests.

Following is a roster of the persons employed at the exhibit:

Arthur B. Strough, Special Agent in charge
Abraham Knechtel, Forester
Charles C. Hembree, Attendant
Victor Mahlstedt, Gardener


AWARDS

The awards were all conferred upon the Forest, Fish and Game Commission
or upon State officials. The juries in the Departments of Forestry, Fish
and Game were made up of eminent specialists, and their work was done in
a thorough and painstaking manner. They expressed themselves in
complimentary terms on the various features of the exhibit, and the
result of their deliberations cannot but be gratifying to all who are
interested in the advanced work of the Empire State in forestry, in
forest preserves and in the protection of our native fish and game.

_List of the Awards Classified Under the Several Groups of the
Official Classification_

GROUP ONE HUNDRED TWELVE

_Appliances and Processes Used in Forestry_

Collective exhibit of progressive forestry. Grand prize
    Seeds of the trees
    Instruments and tools used in forestry
    Forest nursery and demonstration plantation
    Photographs
    Native trees with botanical specimens
    Forest insects

William F. Fox, for services in the forestry exhibit. Gold medal
Arthur B. Strough, for services in forestry exhibit. Silver medal
Abraham Knechtel, for services in forestry exhibit. Silver medal
E. P. Felt, D. Sc., for services in entomological exhibit, forest
insects. Silver medal


GROUP ONE HUNDRED THIRTEEN

_Products of the Cultivation of Forests_

Model sportsman's camp and outfit. Gold medal
Exhibit of woods, by-products, etc. Grand prize
William F. Fox, for services on sportsman's camp exhibit. Silver medal


GROUP ONE HUNDRED TWENTY-ONE

_Products of Hunting_

Collective exhibit of animals and birds. Gold medal
Arthur B. Strough, for services on game and sporting exhibit.
  Silver medal


GROUP ONE HUNDRED TWENTY-TWO

_Fishing Equipment and Products_

Collective exhibit of fish. Grand prize
John D. Whish, for making collection of fish. Silver medal

A summary of the awards is as follows:
Three grand prizes
Three gold medals
Six silver medals

The exhibit in this department differed somewhat from the State exhibits
in other departments in that, with the exception of a very few articles,
which were loaned by private parties to complete or supplement the
collections, the showing was exclusively a State exhibit.


SOME SURPRISING FACTS

The exhibit as a whole was immensely popular from the very first day.
The people visiting the Exposition were largely from the southern and
middle western states, and seemed very generally to believe that New
York's forests, fish and game has passed away with the advance of
civilization. Most of them were greatly surprised to learn that
one-fourth of the State is wild land, which will in all probability
always be devoted largely to forests, and that the State has so many
wild deer that 6,000 of them are killed annually without any apparent
decrease of the number.

The sportsman's camp served the purpose of advertising the great
Adirondack region as a summer resort, and a great many visitors
expressed their intention of visiting that locality in the near future.

Probably one of the best features of the exhibit was the work shown by
the Commission in progressive forestry. This State being in the van of
the forestry movement was looked to to point out the path of
professional forestry, and if no other award had been made than the
grand prize by the scientific jury that served in that Department, we
would feel as though our efforts has been appreciated and that our
labors had not been in vain.


[Illustration: IGOROTE VILLAGE, PHILIPPINE RESERVATION]



CHAPTER XIV

Mines and Metallurgy Exhibit and Schedule of Awards


MINES AND METALLURGY EXHIBIT By H. H. HINDSHAW Special Agent of the
State Museum

[Illustration]

As in previous expositions at which the State of New York has been an
exhibitor, the scientific exhibits were made through the organization of
the State Museum. Dr. F. J. H. Merrill, the director of the museum,
assigned to the writer the duty of preparing the exhibit to be made
under his direction. The available time and money entered largely into
the settlement of the question of what form the exhibit should take.


SCOPE OF EXHIBIT

It was thought best to confine the scope of the main exhibit to the
technologic and commercial aspects of geology and mineralogy. A
judicious selection of materials made to show the mineral wealth of the
State was considered more desirable than to make merely a large display.
Many of the materials exhibited were taken from the State Museum
collections, supplemented where necessary by such additions as could be
obtained within the required time.

The benefit derived by the State from such exhibits is often much more
apparent than that which is to be derived by the individual exhibitors,
and on this account the Commission is particularly indebted to those
firms and individuals which went to considerable expense in preparing
exhibits along lines which were intended more to represent all phases of
an industry rather than to show the products of a single firm.

Those deserving especial mention in this connection are The Solvay
Process Company, of Syracuse; The H. H. Mathews Consolidated Slate
Company, of Boston; the Helderberg Cement Company, of Howes Cave; The
Hudson River Bluestone Company, of New York; the Medina Sandstone
Company, of New York, and the United States Gypsum Company, of Chicago.


INSTALLATION

The cases used were taken from the museum, and suitable stands for the
building stone and other exhibits were constructed in Albany. On account
of the weight of the specimens exhibited the floor had to be
strengthened. This work, as well as the building of platforms and
partitions, was done under contract by Messrs. Caldwell and Drake.

The exhibits of mineral resources may be divided into the metallic and
non-metallic groups.


IRON

In the first division in our State, iron is by far the most important
and probably the one with which the people of the State are least
acquainted. A few years ago New York stood near the head of the iron
producing states. The depression in the iron industries, commencing
about 1888, and the discovery about that time of the seemingly
inexhaustible deposits of rich ores in the Lake Superior region,
however, resulted in shutting down nearly all of our mines. For the last
few years little attention has been paid to them, and they seem to have
been popularly supposed to have been worked out. The Exposition gave an
opportunity of showing this supposition to be incorrect, and recent
investigations show that the deposits are of much greater extent and
value than was known in the eighties. With but one or two exceptions
none of the mines then worked are exhausted, and immense bodies of
valuable ore have not been touched. Most of the non-mining localities
were represented by specimens from the museum collections. Messrs.
Witherbee, Sherman & Company exhibited a series of ores and concentrates
from Mineville, the Arnold Mining Company, magnetites and martite from
Arnold Hill, and the Chateaugay Ore and Iron Company, specimens from
Lyon Mountain.


MAGNETITE

A series of magnetite and associated rocks from the Tilly Foster and
other mines were supplemented by a model of the Tilly Foster mine which
was loaned to the museum for this purpose by the Columbia School of
Mines.


HEMATITES

The St. Lawrence and Jefferson county hematites were represented by
large specimens of ore and by a series of associated rocks and minerals,
including some beautiful specimens of millerite, chalcedite, etc. These
hematites are mined in a belt about thirty miles long reaching from
Philadelphia, Jefferson county, into Hermon, St. Lawrence county. They
are known as the Antwerp red hematites, and, being very easily smelted,
are mixed with more refractory ores.

The Clinton or fossil ores extend in a belt across the central part of
the State and are mined in the vicinity of Clinton, Oneida county, and
in Ontario and Wayne counties.

The limonites shown from Dutchess and Columbia counties included some
fine specimens of stalactitic ore.

Carbonate ores were shown from Columbia and Ulster counties, where there
are extensive deposits on both sides of the Hudson river.


MAGNETIC SEPARATOR

A feature of the iron ore exhibit was a magnetic separator supplied by
the Wetherill Separator Company, of New York. This was kept at work on
the magnetite ores from Mineville, and was of great interest not only in
showing the method of concentrating the magnetic ore, but also in saving
the phosphorus which occurs in the form of the mineral apatite and which
is of considerable value in the manufacture of fertilizers. A large
quantity of ore was donated for this purpose by Messrs. Witherbee,
Sherman & Company.


LEAD

Lead, generally associated with zinc and sometimes copper, has been
mined on a small scale from very early times in Ulster and Sullivan
counties, and more recently in St. Lawrence county. Many other
localities have yielded small quantities of these minerals.

A set of specimens was exhibited by the Ellenville Zinc Company,
consisting of strikingly beautiful crystalline masses of quartz galina,
sphalerite and chalcopyrite and specimens of the rare mineral, brookite.
There was also shown in the same case concentrates from the Ellenville
mine of lead, zinc and copper made both by jigging and by magnetic
separation, and a collection of ores and associated minerals and rocks
from Rossie and Wurtzboro.


NON-METALLIC MINERALS

A large part of this exhibit consisted of construction materials, stone,
slate, brick, tiling and cement. Most of the building stone was
exhibited in the form of ten-inch cubes arranged on three pyramidal
stands. Only a few of these were especially collected for this
Exposition. Many more which were considered desirable could not be
obtained in time on account of the inclement weather conditions of the
preceding winter.


GRANITES

The granitic rocks included granite, gneisses, syenites and norite. This
series only inadequately represented the New York granites. Among the
most striking examples shown were the coarse grained red granite from
Grindstone island in the St. Lawrence river, the Mohican granite from
Peekskill, Westchester county, which is being extensively used in the
Cathedral of St. John the Divine in New York city, and the dark green
labradorite rock known as the Ausable granite from Keeseville, Essex
county. There are many interesting granite deposits, especially in the
Adirondack region, which have not been developed.


MARBLES

The marbles included some fine examples of decorative stone from South
Dover, Dutchess county, the black marble from Glens Falls, monumental
and building marbles from Gouverneur, St. Lawrence county, and white
building marbles from southeastern New York.


LIMESTONES

Limestones of excellent quality are quarried in a great number of
localities and were well represented, some of them showing as fine a
polished surface as the true marbles.


SANDSTONES

The State is also rich in sandstones of good quality. The Potsdam
sandstone forms an almost complete belt around the Adirondacks and is an
excellent building stone. Its color is from white to pale red, and in
many places it is an extremely hard quartzite. Specimens were shown from
Potsdam, St. Lawrence county.

The white sandstones of Washington county have been extensively used for
refractory purposes in the manufacture of steel, being almost free from
iron. The Medina sandstones are quarried in the neighborhood of Medina,
Albion and Lockport. While a pure white stone occurs at Lewiston, the
Medina stone is generally of a pinkish red color. It is extensively used
as a building stone, particularly in Buffalo and Rochester. It is
valuable for paving, curbing and flagging. The Medina Sandstone Company
exhibited a piece of wall work to show the various methods of finish,
including a finely carved lintel. A number of cubes were exhibited from
various quarries.

The sandstones of southern New York occurring in the rocks of Devonian
age are generally fine grained and blue or greenish in color and are
known as bluestones. Most of the quarries are in the counties of Greene,
Ulster, Broome, Delaware and Sullivan. They are described in New York
State Museum Bulletin 61 by Harold T. Dickinson. There is a great
variety in color and physical properties of stone from these quarries.
It is used as building stone and for trimming, and some of it is
especially valuable for large platforms. A large proportion of the
output is in the form of flagging and curbstone.

The Hudson River Bluestone Company exhibited a piece of wall built into
the base of the pyramidal stand holding the sandstone cubes. This was
designed to show the ease with which it can be worked and included some
finely carved lettering. The main entrance to the exhibit was paved with
flags and tiles of this material.


SLATE

With the sandstones were shown some ten-inch cubes of slate cut from the
quarries of the H. H. Mathews Consolidated Slate Company, of Boston,
which operates a number of quarries in Washington county. The slate belt
covers an area of about 320 square miles, the larger part of which is in
Washington county, N. Y., but which extends across the line into Rutland
county, Vt. This is probably the richest slate region in the world. The
beds are of great thickness, belonging to two distinct geologic
formations. They are folded on one another in such a manner as to
present the workable beds in long parallel ridges.

On account of its great strength and easy working qualities new uses are
constantly being found for slate. One of the most striking features of
the slate exhibit was a mantel built of rough slabs of dark red slate
showing the cross fracture to have a fine satiny texture. This was a
copy of a mantel designed by Lord & Hewlet, of New York, and built in a
Poultney, Vt., residence. The main slate exhibit consisted of a stand
supporting a slated roof, one side of which was covered with unfading
green slates one inch thick, such as were laid on Senator Clark's New
York residence. The other side was covered with rough thick slabs of
unfading red. The sides of the stand were covered with the regular trade
slates in four sections--red, green, purple and variegated. The uses of
slate for construction purposes were shown by slabs and panels on the
upper part of the stand.


CEMENT

The cement exhibit was made by the Helderberg Cement Company, of Howes
Cave. One side of the exhibit stand was devoted to Portland and the
other to natural cements. Barrels and bags of finished cement formed the
base of the structure on which were glass jars containing the rock in
its stages of manufacture, with a series of photographs of the works and
of buildings of cement. On account of the rapidly extending applications
of cement a large section outside of the building was set aside for
exhibits of the uses of cement, and the exhibit was designed mainly to
show the manufacture, the materials used and the method of their
treatment.


GYPSUM

Gypsum was shown by a fine series of specimens contributed by the United
States Gypsum Company from their mines in western New York. This
material, like cement, is rapidly being adapted for a variety of
purposes, especially in the finish and ornamentation of buildings, and
the exhibit, encased in one of the square plate glass museum cases with
its cut and polished cubes of raw gypsum, selenite crystals, jars of
stucco colors and examples of plaster casts, made a very attractive
exhibit. In another case there was exhibited gypsum in various forms
from other sources.


SALT

The salt exhibit was made up from a very complete set of specimens in
sample jars taken from the Museum collections, and a large number of
packages from the manufacturers. The salt of New York is obtained from
the salina formation in the western part of the State. The industry is
of great importance. The deposits are described in State Museum Bulletin
11 by Dr. F. J. H. Merrill. One of the most interesting varieties shown
was the solar salt, which has been made on the Onondaga Salt
Reservation, Syracuse, since 1788. Blocks of rock salt were shown from
the Retsof and Livonia shafts.

Most of the salt produced, however, is from wells bored down through the
rock salt beds, and is pumped up in the form of brine and evaporated by
artificial heat.


SOLVAY PROCESS COMPANY

The Solvay Process Company, of Syracuse, made a splendid display of soda
ash. The plant of this company uses an immense amount of salt which is
obtained from the Tully districts and carried by pipes to Solvay. The
raw materials used were shown in the lower sections of two cases
especially constructed for the exhibit, which also held a set of barrels
and other packages in which the soda is shipped. In the upper sections
were shown a series of large glass jars with the various products. These
were supplied with a series of labels completely describing the process
of manufacture and the chemical changes which take place. Above the case
there was a set of photographs of the works, illustrating the social
life of the work-people employed and the growth of the establishment.


USEFUL MINERALS

The exhibit of the useful minerals of the State was principally prepared
by H. P. Whitlock of the Museum staff. One case contained a set of the
abrasive materials, the most important of these being garnet, which is
found in great quantities in the Adirondacks. Crude garnet from several
mines, the ground and cleaned garnet, and grades of garnet paper were
shown. A small millstone to represent the celebrated Esopus grit, emery
ore from Peekskill, and quartz and sand from many localities were also
exhibited in this case. Another case was filled with feldspar, mica and
quartz, which usually occur associated with each other in the form of
pegmetite dikes in the crystalline rocks of the Adirondacks and the
Highlands of the Hudson. These materials are not as yet very extensively
mined but an increasing demand for them is bringing to light many
promising localities.


GRAPHITE

Another valuable mineral which occurs in the State in great quantities
is graphite. Specimens of both the crude ore and manufactured graphite
were exhibited. The deposits of this material in the form of graphitic
limestone cover miles of territory, but more satisfactory processes for
its concentration are needed to make it available for use, especially in
the higher grades.


MUSEUM PUBLICATIONS

The Museum exhibited a set of its publications on geologic subjects, a
set of published maps and maps specially prepared for this exhibit to
show the distribution of useful minerals, and a number of enlarged
photographs.


PALEONTOLOGY

The exhibit of the Department of Paleontology consisted of a set of its
publications on the paleontology of the State of New York--35
volumes--covering the period 1847-1904, and a set of wing frames with
many of the original drawings and plates used in their illustration.


SPECIAL FEATURES

The most striking feature of the exhibit was an immense slab of Potsdam
sandstone from Bidwell's Crossing, Clinton county, which was part of the
premoidial or cambrian beach laid down about the shores of the
Adirondack continental nucleus. The slab shows the trails of animals
crossing in all directions, especially those known as clemactechnites,
said by Dr. J. M. Clarke to have been made by a a simple primitive type
of mollusk. The slab, weighing over fifteen tons, was moved in six
sections and put together for exhibition.

Restorations in plaster of paris of the fossil crustaceous eurypterus
and hughmilleria were also exhibited.


CLAYS

The exhibition of clays and clay products was made by the State School
of Ceramics, at Alfred, N. Y., under the direction of Professor Charles
F. Binns, and included some large vases, the work of students.

The State of New York has long held an important place in the brick
trade on account of its unlimited quantities of clay along the Hudson
river, which have not only supplied much of the brick used for building
in New York city, but bricks have been shipped from this source long
distances by water. The finer varieties of clay have not been worked to
any extent except on Long Island, but other conditions have resulted in
the establishment of potteries at Brooklyn, Syracuse and other points,
using almost exclusively clays imported into the State. The beds of
feldspar and flint now being exploited in the Adirondacks will
materially help to put this class of potteries on a firmer basis.

The center of the exhibition space was devoted to a pagoda designed to
show the kinds of brick manufactured in the principal localities. The
roof afforded an excellent place to exhibit earthenware tiling.

The General Electric Company exhibited a case of insulators, many of
them of special types, from their Schenectady pottery. Insulators were
also exhibited by Pass & Seymour, of Syracuse, and the Empire China
Works, of Brooklyn.


PETROLEUM

The petroleum exhibit was made under the general direction of Secretary
and Chief Executive Officer Charles A. Ball. An extensive series of
crude and refined oils and by-products occupied a case showing on both
sides. On this was installed a model of a tower and drilling machinery
such as is used in sinking oil wells. The records printed on the labels
furnished data which made an important addition to our previous
knowledge of the New York oil fields.

In addition to those heretofore mentioned, the following gentlemen
assisted as indicated in the preparation of the exhibit, and are
entitled to no small credit for the valuable assistance rendered.

E. E. Engelhardt was engaged in the acquisition of the salt exhibits.

J. S. Bellamy collected the petroleum exhibit under the immediate
direction of Secretary Ball.

C. F. Binns collected the exhibit of clay products under the immediate
direction of the State Commission.

W. C. Richard assisted in installing the exhibit.

Frederick Braun installed the slab of Potsdam sandstone.

The following members of the staff of the State Museum also assisted:
H.S. Mattimore, C.A. Trask, E.C. Kenny, D.D. Luther and Joseph Morje.

_Catalogue of Exhibitors in the Department of Mines and Metallurgy,
with the Award, if Any, Received by Each_

GROUP ONE HUNDRED SIXTEEN
_Minerals and Stones_
Adirondack Pyrites Co., Gouverneur
    Pyrites: crude and concentrates
Alfred Clay Co., Alfred Station
    Brick
    Tile
Algonquin Red Slate Co., Truthville
    Mineral paint
Alps Oil Co., Alma
    Crude oil
Applebee & Baldwin, Scio
    Crude oil
Arnold Mining Co. Bronze medal
    Iron ores
Attica Brick and Tile Co., Attica
    Brick
Atwood & McEwen, Andover
    Crude oil
J.J. Barron, Three Mile Bay
    Limestone (Trenton)
H.H. Barton Son & Co., North Creek and Minerva
    Garnet and garnet paper
Herman Behr & Co., North River. Silver medal
    Garnet and garnet paper
Milo M. Belding, Gouverneur
    Marble
Bellamy & Elliott, Scio
    Crude oil
Frank Bennett, Staten Island
    Diabase
J. B. Berridge, Hudson
    Limestone (Helderberg)
H. Boice & Co., Rondout
    Bluestone
A. F. Bouton, Roxbury
    Red sandstone (Catskill)
Burhans & Brainard, Saugerties
    Bluestone
Eugene Campbell, New Baltimore
    Limestone (Helderberg)
Canton Marble Quarry, Canton
    Marble
B. & J. Carpenter, Lockport
    Limestone (Niagara)
Celadon Roofing Co., Alfred
    Tile roofs
Church & Bradley, Alma
    Crude oil
Church & Co., Wellsville
    Crude oil
Clark, Tracey & Co., West Union
    Crude oil
Conner Paint Mfg. Co
    Mineral paint
Consolidated Wheatland Plaster Co., Wheatland
    Gypsum
    Land plaster
Corning Brick, Tile & Terra Cotta Co., Corning
    Brick
Delaware Milling, Mining & Mfg. Co., Roxbury
    Mineral paint
Albert Dibble, Belvidere
    Bluestone
Joseph Dixon Crucible Co., Ticonderoga
    Graphite
Duford & Son, Chaumont
    Limestone (Trenton)
Ellenville Zinc Co., Ellenville
    Lead and zinc: zinc blende, chalcopyrite, galena, lead, zinc
    and copper concentrates
Empire China Works, Brooklyn
    Insulators
Empire Gas and Fuel Co., Ltd., Willink
    Crude oil
Empire Marble Co., Gouverneur
    Marble
Empire Salt Co. Silver medal
    Salt
Extra Dark Marble Co., Gouverneur
    Marble
Foery & Kastner, Rochester
    Limestone
D. R. & H. Fogelsinger, Buffalo
    Limestone (Onondaga)
Franchot Bros., Scio
    Crude oil
R. Forsyth, Grindstone Island
    Granite
General Electric Co., Schenectady. Gold medal
    Insulators
Genesee Salt Co., Pifford
    Salt
Glens Falls Co., Glens Falls
    Limestone (Trenton)
Adelbert Gordon, Batchellerville
    Mica
    Feldspar
Gouverneur Garnet Co., Gouverneur
    Garnet
J. B. Gray, Geneseo
    Oil sand and crude oil
Ezra Grinnell, Port Gibson
    Plaster of paris
    Land plaster
Grumply Oil Co., Rexville
    Crude oil
Helderberg Cement Co., Howes Cave. Gold medal
    Cement
D. C. Hewitt, Amsterdam
    Limestone (Calciferous)
High Falls Pyrites Co., Canton
    Pyrites
Horan Bros., Medina
    Sandstone
Horseheads Brick Co., Horseheads
    Brick
L. W. Hotchkiss, Lewiston
    Sandstone (Medina)
Hudson River Bluestone Co., Ulster county. Silver medal
    Bluestone
International Graphite Co., Ticonderoga
    Graphite
International Pulp Co., Gouverneur
    Talc
International Salt Co., Ithaca
    Salt
Interstate Conduit & Brick Co., Ithaca
    Brick
Jamestown Shale Paving Brick Co., Jamestown
    Brick
Jewettville Pressed Brick & Paving Co., Jewettville
    Brick
R. Jones, Prospect
    Graphite
J. F. Kilgour, Lordville
    Bluestone
F. H. Kinkel, Bedford
    Feldspar
    Quartz
A. Gracie King, Garrisons
    Granite
Francis Larkins, Ossining
    Granite
B. B. Mason, Keeseville
    Norite
Masterton & Hall, Tuckahoe
    Marble
H. H. Mathews Consolidated Slate Co., Washington county. Gold
      medal
    Slate
G. J. McClure, Ithaca
    Bluestone
J. H. McCutcheon, Lancaster
    Brick
James McEwen, Wellsville
    Crude oil
J. C. & A. McMurray, Olean
    Brick
Medina Quarry Co., New York city. Silver medal
    Sandstone
M. Mervine, Whitesville
    Crude oil
Morris & Strobel, LeRoy
    Limestone
Mount Eve Granite Co., Mount Eve
    Granite
Mutual Gas Co., Andover
    Crude oil
National Salt Co., Ithaca and Warsaw. Silver medal
    Salt
National Wall Plaster Co., Fayetteville
    Crude gypsum
    Plaster of paris
    Land plaster
James Nevins & Son, Walton
    Bluestone
New York State School of Clay Working and Ceramics, Alfred
Silver medal
    Clay products
New York Hydraulic Pressed Brick Co., Canandaigua
    Brick
New York State Museum, Department of Paleontology. Grand
prize
    General Exhibit in Paleontology, including publications, slab
      of Potsdam sandstone, restorations of fossils
New York State Museum. Bronze medal
    Plaster Model of Tilly Foster Iron Mine
New York State Museum. Gold medal
    Publications on Geology, Mineralogy, Topography, Quarrying,
      Mining, Metallurgy, Development of Water Resources, etc.
New York State Museum. Gold medal
    Collection of Minerals and Building Stones
New York State Museum. Silver medal
    Ten Geologic maps of the State of New York and special
      parts thereof
    Relief Map of New York
    Hypsometric Map of New York
    Road Map of New York
    Sixty-four photographic enlargements illustrating New York
      State mineral resources and other geological features; size,
      11 by 14 inches
New York State Museum. Silver medal
    Collective Exhibit
Northern New York Marble Co., Gouverneur
    Marble
North River Garnet Co., Ticonderoga
    Garnet
Oakfield Plaster Manufacturing Co., Oakfield
    Gypsum
Onondaga Coarse Salt Association, Syracuse. Silver medal
    Solar salt
Ontario Talc Co., Gouverneur
    Talc
D. Parmatir, Potsdam
    Sandstone
Pass & Seymour, Syracuse
    Insulators
Peter Pitkin's Sons, Portageville
    Bluestone
Potsdam Sandstone Co., Potsdam
    Sandstone
A. L. Pritchard, Pleasantville
    Marble
Queen City Brick Co., Buffalo
    Brick
Quick & Co., Alma
    Crude oil
Remington Salt Co., Syracuse
    Salt
Retsof Mining Co., Retsof and Livonia
    Rock salt
W. Rielly, Cobleskill
    Limestone
E. P. Roberts, Cortland
    Granite
Robins Conveying Belt Co., New York city
    Belts and conveyor on separator
Rochester Brick & Tile Co., Rochester
    Brick
Rossie Metallic Paint Co., Rossie
    Mineral paint
Rudolph & Dotterwich, Allegany
    Crude oil
D. G. Scholten, Gouverneur. Bronze medal
    Marble
Scio Oil & Gas Co., Scio
    Oil sand and crude oil
C. R. Scott, Alma
    Crude oil
Scott, Fuller & Fay, South Bolivar
    Crude oil
George W. Searles, White Lead Lake, Herkimer county
    Infusorial earth
J. Shanahan, Tribes Hill
    Limestone
J. Shear & Co., Schenectady
    Sandstone
Solvay Process Co., Syracuse. Grand prize
    Salt products
Solvay Process Co., Syracuse
    Limestone (Onondaga)
South Dover Marble Co., South Dover
    Marble
St. Lawrence Marble Co., Gouverneur
    Marble
A. D. Symonds, Elmira
    Bluestone
The Tanite Co., Cortland
    Emery
Evan T. Thomas, Prospect
    Limestone
F. Thomas, Troy
    Mineral paint
Loren Thomas, Waterloo
    Marble
James Thornton Estate, Alma
    Crude oil
Ticonderoga Graphite Co., Ticonderoga
    Graphite
Tonawanda Brick Co., Tonawanda
    Brick
W. B. Underhill Brick Co., Croton Landing
    Sand
Union Salt Co., Watkins
    Salt
Union Talc Co., Gouverneur
    Talc
United States Gypsum Co., Oakfield. Grand prize
    Gypsum
    Statuary of plaster of paris
United States Talc Co., Gouverneur
    Talc
James Van Etten, Granite
    Millstones
Vosburg Oil Co., Bolivar
    Oil sand and crude oil
Vossler Bros & Quick, Alma
    Crude oil
Warsaw Bluestone Co., Rock Glen
    Bluestone
Watertown Marble Co., Watertown
    Marble
Watkins Salt Co., Watkins
    Salt
Wells & Hall, Ogdensburg
    Mineral paint
Wetherill Separating Co., New York city. Gold medal
    Wetherill magnetic separator, Type E, No. 3, working on
      New York magnetic iron ores
L. H. White, Saratoga Springs
    Granite
White Crystal Marble Co., Gouverneur
    Marble Ashler
Williamson & Co., Northport
    Sand
Witherbee, Sherman & Co., Mineville. Silver medal
    Iron ore
Worcester Salt Co., Silver Springs. Silver medal
    Salt

[Illustration: VARIED INDUSTRIES BUILDING AND PLAZA ST. LOUIS]



CHAPTER XV

Social Economy Exhibit and Schedule of Awards


SOCIAL ECONOMY EXHIBIT By DELANCEY M. ELLIS Director of Education and
Social Economy


The Department of Social Economy being closely allied with the
Department of Education, and its exhibit being installed in the Palace
of Education, it was placed under the general charge of the Director of
Education, whose title was changed to the Director of Education and
Social Economy.


APPROPRIATIONS

The following appropriations were made for exhibits in this department:

State Commission in Lunacy, ------------ $1,800
State Board Of Charities, --------------  1,200
State Department Of Prisons, -----------  2,000
State Department Of Labor, -------------  1,000
Craig Colony for Epileptics, Sonyea, ---    500
General expenses, ----------------------  1,000
                                        -------
Total, --------------------------------- $7,500
                                        -------

From the last named appropriation was paid the expenses for the exhibits
of the State Department of Health and the State Department of Excise,
and such other institutions or associations as were properly included in
this class.


PREPARATION OF EXHIBITS

All of the exhibits of State Departments were prepared by the
departments contributing them, and in the case of the State Commission
in Lunacy and the State Board of Charities the exhibits were installed
by a special representative. This also is true of the exhibit of the
State Department of Prisons, which required the constant attendance of
an expert to demonstrate its workings.

During the latter part of the Exposition period William T. Arms, an
attache of the State building, was detailed to the Department of Social
Economy, and dividing his time among the several State exhibits, added
materially to the pleasure and knowledge of visitors concerning New
York's institutions.


PLAN OF ARRANGEMENT

The Exposition authorities determined that the exhibits in the
Department of Social Economy should be collective; that is, that all the
work in the Department of Charities and Corrections from whatever source
should be installed together; the same to be true of general betterment
movements, hygiene, municipal improvement, etc. This plan precluded the
installation of the State's exhibit in this department in one place with
a dignified installation, as in the other exhibit departments, and made
necessary the placing of the exhibit in several different parts of the
building according to the subdivision of the classification under which
it fell. Perhaps from the standard of general utility the arrangement
was all that could be desired, but from the standpoint of the State it
is of doubtful value, as such a disposition of the State's exhibit made
no single part of it of any considerable size, nor as impressive as had
the State's work in this department been shown together.

No State in the Union approaches the Empire State in its progressive
policy in the care of the insane, the destitute and delinquents, in the
solving of labor and excise problems, and had the exhibit in this
department been installed together, a most effective and striking lesson
would have been taught.


STATE COMMISSION IN LUNACY

The exhibit of the New York State Commission in Lunacy was the most
suggestive and comprehensive of any shown in the Department for the
Insane, and was designed primarily to show the difference between the
ancient and modern methods of treating these unfortunates. Two rooms
were shown, the first of which represented the primitive methods adopted
for treating insanity. The room was barren, dark and not over clean. At
the front was shown one of the old peep-doors taken from the Utica
Asylum. It was of massive construction and contained a small aperture
covered by a heavy wooden blind, through which the attendant could
observe the doings of the patient, or, more properly speaking, the
prisoner. Within stood one of the so-called Utica cribs built of heavy
wood, over which was a cover of wooden bars. In this crib the patient
was obliged to remain in a recumbent position, the cover closed and
locked. Near by stood a restraining chair, a whirling chair, a straight
jacket and shackles, all representing ancient methods of "quieting" the
victims of the dread disease.

Adjoining was an airy room, clean and inviting, made cheerful by growing
plants and attractive furniture, with every modern appliance for the
care of an invalid, resembling closely a room of the better class in a
general hospital. There was an entire absence of any kind of restraint.
A neat iron bedstead, rocking chairs, invalid table, wash stand, book
case with books, and in fact every comfort and convenience was at hand.
In this room were also shown the uniforms worn by the nurses and
attendants in the State hospitals for the insane, and a series of
reference books upon the subject of insanity, The exhibit was
supplemented by a series of handsome photographs completely illustrating
the various State hospitals for the insane, the daily life of the
inmates and the expert attention which they receive.

Glass cases contained a large amount of industrial work done by the
inmates. This chiefly consisted of sewing and embroidery. A feature of
the exhibit was an oak cabinet containing a series of specimens showing
cross sections of the brain prepared at the Pathological Institute in
New York city. It was of decided scientific value and interest. Near by
was a miniature tent hospital, a complete model of the hospital for the
care of insane patients afflicted with tuberculosis which is now in
operation at the Manhattan State Hospital, Ward's Island, N. Y.

A striking feature was a copy of the famous oil painting, "Dr. Pinel
Freeing the Insane at La Salpètrière after the close of the French
Revolution." It most graphically told the story of the complete
revolution in treating this dread disease.


STATE BOARD OF CHARITIES

The exhibit of the State Board of Charities was installed under four
different subdivisions of Group 139 (Charities and Corrections) of the
official classification.

1. Class 784. Destitute, neglected and delinquent children
2. Class 785. Institutional care of destitute adults
3. Class 787. Hospitals, dispensaries and nursing
4. Class 789. Treatment of criminals

The exhibit of the Board in the department for the care of juvenile
delinquents was comprehensive in its make up. Photographs of the various
State institutions devoted to this purpose were shown, clearly
demonstrating the superiority of these institutions as to buildings,
equipment and maintenance. These photographs were supplemented by an
exhibit of industrial work of the inmates.

The State Industrial School at Rochester and the House of Refuge for
Juvenile Delinquents at Randall's Island both contributed some
exceptional work in wood carving and wrought iron.

In addition to this were shown the uniforms worn in the different
institutions and also specimens of the scholastic work which the
children are doing.

The State Board of Charities also assumed the responsibility for, and
partially prepared, the exhibit of various charity organization
societies within the State, by far the most elaborate of which was the
exhibit of the Charity Organization Society of New York city. By means
of photographs, administrative blanks and reports the great work which
this organization is doing was clearly revealed.

The work of the Board in the care of destitute adults was demonstrated
by means of a complete set of photographs of the county alms houses of
the State of New York. From two to four pictures of each institution
were shown, giving a very clear idea of their scope and equipment. These
photographs were supplemented by a statistical blank containing valuable
data as to the value of the plant, number of employees, of inmates, and
such other information as would be useful to the public.

The exhibit of the work of the Board as related to general hospitals of
the State consisted largely of a series of photographs, supplemented by
valuable statistical matter.

The Board also prepared an exhibit from the various State prisons, the
industrial work of which is under the jurisdiction of the State Prison
Commission. This exhibit contained photographs of the members of the
State Prison Commission, photographs showing the interiors of the
different prisons, reports, etc., and revealed the fact that the Empire
State is in the front rank in inaugurating reform movements looking
toward the health, safety and moral uplift of the inmates.


STATE DEPARTMENT OF PRISONS

The exhibit of the State Department of Prisons probably received as much
attention from the public as any single State exhibit prepared. It
consisted of a demonstration of the workings of the Bertillon and finger
print systems for the identification of criminals. An ornate
installation of solid oak, handsomely carved, was built by the inmates
of the State Prison at Ossining, and was carried to St. Louis and
erected upon the space assigned to this department.

Throughout the season Captain J.H. Parke, an expert on the finger print
system, and E.E. Davis, Jr., an expert on the Bertillon system, were
present to demonstrate the workings of these systems to Exposition
visitors. But few are familiar with the operations of the Bertillon
system, and the finger print system is as yet practically unknown.

New York State is the pioneer State of the Union in putting into
practical operation the finger print system for the identification of
criminals, and it is the only State in which it is at present in use.
Although there is a National Bureau of Identification at Washington, D.
C., which is conducted through the co-operation of the chiefs of police
of many of the large cities throughout the country, it cannot be said to
be a department of the United States government, and its system is far
from as perfect as that of the Empire State.


STATE DEPARTMENT OF LABOR

Probably in no State of the Union does there exist a labor department
organized upon such extensive lines as is that of the State of New York.
Recently three bureaus were merged forming the State Department of
Labor. These were the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the Board of Mediation
and Arbitration and the office of the Factory Inspector. The exhibit
consisted of a complete set of reports of these various bureaus, and of
the department erected therefrom, supplemented with a series of graphic
charts bearing upon every phase of the labor question, and comparing the
economic condition of the Empire State with that of other States of the
Union and various foreign countries. The exhibit was a valuable
sociological contribution. An especially strong feature was four
monographs, entitled "Typical Employers' Welfare Institutions in New
York," "Labor Legislation in New York," "The Work of the State
Department of Labor," and "The Growth of Industry in New York." These
were printed in such quantities as to permit of their distribution among
visitors to the Exposition. The graphic charts were reproduced in
half-tones and inserted in the monographs.

The exhibit was carefully studied by students of sociology generally as
it is recognized that the State of New York speaks with a voice of
authority upon questions of this nature.


STATE DEPARTMENT OF EXCISE

The question of controlling the liquor traffic is one of lively interest
throughout the civilized world. The exhibit of the State Department of
Excise was so prepared as to clearly demonstrate the superiority of the
system of State control in licensing this traffic as administered under
the New York State Liquor Tax Law. The exhibit consisted of a series of
graphic charts showing this statute's moral benefit to the people of the
State by reducing the number of drinking places more than twenty per
cent and increasing the amount collected from liquor licenses from about
three million to about eighteen million dollars annually. By means of a
key, which accompanied the charts, the visitor was enabled easily to
trace the development of the law since its first enactment and to see
the efficiency with which it is enforced.


STATE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH

The exhibit of the State Department of Health was made up of a complete
set of reports of the department, supplemented by administrative blanks
used in the enforcement of the Health Law, and photographs showing the
offices of the department, the anti-toxin laboratory and other features
of the department's work. A full set of blanks used in the collection of
vital statistics and sample specimens of anti-toxin and anti-tetanus,
which are distributed without charge by the department, completed the
exhibit.


CRAIG COLONY

The exhibit of Craig Colony consisted of a model designed to show the
ideal institution for the care, education and treatment of epileptics,
towards which Craig Colony in its development is working. The model was
skillfully constructed and cost considerably more than the appropriation
made by the Commission, the balance being paid from private sources.


MISCELLANEOUS EXHIBITS

The New York State exhibit in the Department of Social Economy also
contained an exhibit of the Woman's Institute at Yonkers, a
philanthropic organization providing for the care of needy families in
their homes and promoting several general betterment movements. The
exhibit consisted of photographs, blanks and statistics bearing upon the
work of the organization.

Close by was an exhibit of the George Junior Republic at Freeville, a
unique institution for the care of juvenile delinquents and carried on
along the lines of a civic organization. The exhibit consisted of
interesting photographs showing the buildings and the plant, also
specimens of blanks and samples of the money in use in the institution,
and a general account of the work since its inception.

One of the most interesting exhibits was that of the Bank of New York,
New York city, which is one of the oldest banks in the United States,
having been organized in 1784 and having since enjoyed a most prosperous
career. In addition to photographs, original by-laws and figures
concerning the present condition of the bank, was exhibited the first
ledger of the institution, which contained the accounts of Aaron Burr,
Robert R. Livingston and other noted contemporaries. In addition were
shown requisitions of Alexander Hamilton, then Secretary of the
Treasury, for loans to the government, and other interesting historical
documents.

The State Library prepared and exhibited an interesting compilation of
sociological legislation and literature which was designed to show the
advanced work done by the library in that direction.

Exhibits were also in place from the Church Association for the
Advancement of the Interests of Labor; the Eastman Kodak Company, of
Rochester, N. Y.; the Blacksmith and Wheelwright; the Sugar Trade
Review, and a volume published by the Mercantile Publishing Company
containing a directory of manufacturers and valuable trade statistics.

_Catalogue of Exhibitors in the Department of Social Economy, Arranged
by Groups, with the Awards, if Any, Received by Each_


GROUP ONE HUNDRED TWENTY-NINE

_Study and Investigation of Social and Economic Conditions_

Blacksmith and Wheelwright, New York city. Silver medal
    Publication
Church Association for the Advancement of the Interests of Labor,
New York city. Silver medal
    Photographs
    Statistics
Division of Sociology, New York State Library, Albany. Silver medal
    A comparative index of sociological legislation and literature
Manufacturers' Publishing Company, New York city. Silver medal
    Directory of Manufacturers
Willett & Gray, New York city. Silver medal
    Sugar Review

The following awards were made to exhibits not a part of the collective
State Exhibit:

American Book Company, New York city. Grand prize
    Text books on economics
R. G. Dunn & Company, Commercial Agency New York city. Silver medal
    Statistics
    Photographs
Richmond C. Hill, secretary Board of Trade, Buffalo. Silver medal


GROUP ONE HUNDRED THIRTY

_Economic Resources and Organization_

Charles Hemstreet, New York city. Silver medal


GROUP ONE HUNDRED THIRTY-ONE

_State Regulation of Industry and Labor_

State Department of Labor, Albany. Grand prize
    Graphic charts
    Reports
    Monographs

The following award was made to an exhibit not a part of the collective
State Exhibit:

American Institute of Social Service, New York city. Gold medal
    Charts
    Photographs
    Statistics


GROUP ONE HUNDRED THIRTY-TWO

_Organization of Industrial Workers_

State Department of Labor, Albany. Grand prize
    Graphic charts
    Reports
    Monographs


GROUP ONE HUNDRED THIRTY-FIVE

_Provident Institutions and Banks_

National Consumers' League, New York city. Grand prize
    Charts
    Printed matter
    Garments.
Bank of New York, New York city. Grand prize
    Historical ledger and documents
    Statistics
    By-laws
    Pictures


GROUP ONE HUNDRED THIRTY-SIX

_Housing of the Working Classes_

The following awards were made to exhibits not a part of the collective
State Exhibit:

J. B. & J. M. Cornell Company. Gold medal
Model Household Nursery. Gold medal
New York city, tenement house department, Lawrence Veiller,
      collaborator. Grand prize
Niagara Development Company, New York city. Silver medal


GROUP ONE HUNDRED THIRTY-SEVEN

_The Liquor Question_

State Department of Excise, Albany. Grand prize
    Graphic charts
    Statistics


GROUP ONE HUNDRED THIRTY-EIGHT

_General Betterment Movements_

National Consumers' League, New York city. Gold medal
    Charts
    Printed matter
    Garments
New York Training School for Deaconesses. Bronze medal
    Photographs
    Prospectus
People's Institute, New York city. Silver medal
    Photographs
    Prospectus
    Reports
Woman's Institute, Yonkers. Silver medal
    Photographs
    Charts
    Statistics
    Administrative blanks
    Reports
Young Women's Christian Association, New York city. Silver
      medal
    Reports
    Statistics
    Administrative blanks
    Art work

The following awards were made to exhibits not a part of the collective
State Exhibit:

American Institute of Social Service, New York city. Grand prize
General Electric Company, Schenectady. Gold medal
Institutional charities, collective exhibit. Gold medal
Prepared and installed by American Institute of Social Service
    St. Bartholomew's Church, New York city
    St. George's Church, New York city
    Washington Square M. E. Church, New York city
    Church of the Ascension, New York city
    Marcy Avenue Church, Brooklyn
    Westminster Presbyterian Church, Buffalo
Mohawk and Hudson River Humane Society, Albany. Gold medal
Siegel-Cooper Company, New York city. Gold medal
J. H. Williams Company, Brooklyn. Silver medal

The following awards were made to collaborators:

Dr. William H. Tolman, New York city. Gold medal
Dr. William W. Stillman, Albany. Gold medal
Mrs. Florence Kelly, New York city. Gold medal


GROUP ONE HUNDRED THIRTY-NINE

_Charities and Corrections_

Brooklyn Bureau of Charities. Gold medal
    Photographs
    Statistics
Buffalo Charity Organization Society. Gold medal
    Photographs
    Statistics
Charity Organization Society, New York city. Grand prize
    Reports
    Charts
    Statistics
    Photographs
    Maps
    Administrative blanks
Cornell University, Department of Philanthropy and Finance, Ithaca.
  Gold medal
    Graphic charts
Craig Colony for Epileptics, Sonyea. Gold medal
    Model of institution
George Junior Republic, Freeville. Gold medal
    Photographs
    Charts
    Statistics
    Reports
Manhattan State Hospital East, Ward's Island, New York city.
Gold medal
    Photographs
    Statistics
Newburg Associated Charities. Silver medal
    Photographs
    Statistics
New York City United Hebrew Charities. Gold medal
    Photographs
    Statistics
State Board of Charities, Albany. Grand prize
    Reports
    Statistics
    Photographs
    Industrial work
    Administrative blanks
State Commission in Lunacy, Albany. Grand prize
    Rooms showing ancient and modern treatment of insane
      patients
    Reports
    Industrial work
    Model tuberculosis hospital
    Pathological specimens
State Commission of Prisons, Albany. Gold medal
    Photographs
    Reports
    Statistics
State Prison Department, Albany. Grand prize
    Working exhibit of Bertillon and Finger Print systems for
      identification of criminals
Woman's Institute, Yonkers. Silver medal
    Photographs
    Charts
    Statistics
    Administrative blanks
    Reports

The following awards were made to collaborators:

Robert W. Hebbard, Secretary State Board of Charities. Gold
  medal
T. E. McGarr, Secretary State Commission in Lunacy. Gold medal
Edward T. Devine, New York city. Gold medal

The following awards were made to exhibits not a part of the collective
State Exhibit:

Association for Improving the Condition of the Poor, Brooklyn.
    Silver medal
Asylum of the Sisters of St. Dominie, New York city. Silver medal
Brooklyn Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children, Brooklyn.
    Silver medal
Catholic Home Bureau, New York city. Gold medal
Children's Aid Society, New York city. Gold medal
Committee on the Prevention of Tuberculosis, New York city. Grand prize
Department of Finance, New York city. Grand prize
Department of Public Charities, New York city. Gold medal
Hebrew Sheltering Guardian Society, New York city. Gold medal
Rev. Thomas L. Kinkead, Peekskill. Gold medal
Lincoln Hospital and Home, New York city. Silver medal
Long Island College Hospital, New York city. Silver medal
Missionary Sisters Third Order of St. Frances, New York city. Gold medal
Mission of the Immaculate Virgin for the Protection of Homeless and
    Destitute Children, New York city. Silver medal
Mount Sinai Hospital for Children, New York city. Silver medal
New York Catholic Protectory, New York city. Gold medal
New York Charity Organization Society, New York city. Grand prize
New York Foundling Hospital, New York city. Silver medal
New York Juvenile Asylum, New York city. Gold medal
New York Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children, New York
    city. Gold medal
Orphans' Home, Brooklyn. Silver medal
St. Vincent's Hospital, New York city. Silver medal
Seton Hospital, New York city. Silver medal
Sisters of Mercy, Gabriels. Gold medal

The following awards were made to collaborators:

Miss Lillian Brandt, New York city. Gold medal
Homer Folks, New York city. Gold medal
Dr. D. C. Potter, New York city. Gold medal


GROUP ONE HUNDRED FORTY

_Public Health._

Rochester, City Department of Health. Gold medal
    Charts
    Statistics
    Photographs
State Department of Health, Albany. Grand prize
    Reports
    Administrative blanks
    Photographs
    Statistics

The following award was made to a collaborator:

Dr. George Goler, Health Officer, Rochester. Gold medal

The following awards were made to exhibits not a part of the collective
State Exhibit:

Adirondack Cottage Sanitorium, Saranac Lake. Grand prize
Dr. Simon Baruch, New York city. Silver medal
Department of Health of the City of New York. Grand prize
Allen Hazen, New York city. Gold medal
Dr. S. Adolphus Knopf, New York city. Gold medal
Kny-Scheerer Company, New York city. Grand prize
Kny-Scheerer Company, Department of Natural Science, New York city. Gold
      medal
Sanitorium Gabriel, Saranac Lake. Gold medal

The following awards were made to collaborators:

Dr. E. L. Trudeau, Saranac Lake. Grand prize
Herman Biggs, M. D., New York city. Gold medal


GROUP ONE HUNDRED FORTY-ONE

_Municipal Improvement_

The following awards were made to exhibits not a part of the collective
State Exhibit:

American Institute of Social Service. Silver medal
    Photographs illustrating municipal conditions
City of New York, Art Commission. Gold medal
City of New York, Aqueduct Commission and Department of Water
    Supply. Gold medal
City of New York, Children's School Farm. Silver medal
City of New York, Department of Street Cleaning. Grand prize

The following awards were made to collaborators:

Mrs. Ruth Ashley Hirschfield. Gold medal
    Model playground and nursery
George W. Waring in recognition of services in the establishment
    of the system used in the Department of Street Cleaning, New
    York city. Gold medal


THE FOLLOWING IS A RECAPITULATION OF THE AWARDS MADE     TO THE STATE OF
NEW YORK IN THE DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL     ECONOMY.

_Grand Prize._

Group 129.................. 1
Group 131.................. 1
Group 132.................. 1
Group 135.................. 2
Group 136.................. 1
Group 137.................. 1
Group 138.................. 1
Group 139.................. 7
Group 139, Collaborators... 1
Group 140.................. 4
Group 140, Collaborators... 1
Group 141.................. 1
                          ---
Total..................... 22
                          ===
_Gold Medal._

Group 131.................. 1
Group 136.................. 2
Group 138................. 10
Group 138, Collaborators... 3
Group 139................. 18
Group 139, Collaborators... 5
Group 140.................. 5
Group 140, Collaborators... 2
Group 141.................. 4
                          ---
Total..................... 50
                          ===

_Silver Medal._

Group 129         7
Group 130         1
Group 136         1
Group 138         5
Group 139        13
Group 140         1
Group 141         2
                ----
  Total.         30
                ====
_Bronze Medal._

Group 138         1
                 ===

Grand prizes.    22
Gold medals.     50
Silver medals.   30
Bronze medal.     1
               -----
  Grand total.  103
               =====

[Illustration: PALACE OF EDUCATION AND SOCIAL ECONOMY FROM FESTIVAL
HALL]



CHAPTER XVI

Financial Statement

EXPENDITURES


GENERAL ADMINISTRATION

Secretary and Chief Executive Officer--
  salary (33 months) ----------------------------  $10,449 17
Secretary and Chief Executive Officer--
  traveling expenses and maintenance at
  St. Louis -------------------------------------    6,528 08
Clerk hire, assistants, stenographers, etc.------    7,143 00
Rent of New York office -------------------------      450 00
Maintenance of Albany office after close of
  Exposition ------------------------------------      550 80
Office fixtures, desks, tables, chairs, etc.           571 19
General traveling expenses of employees
  and other officials and expense of
  maintenance at St. Louis ----------------------    3,367 38
Printing and engraving, stationery and
  office supplies, including all engraving
  for functions given by Commission -------------    4,461 98
Express, freight, cartage, telephone (local
  and long distance) and telegraph --------------    1,481 65
Petty cash, including postage, car fares,
  messenger service, sundry supplies, etc . -----    3,615 07
Railroad and hotel expenses of individual
  members of Commission for attendance
  at meetings in New York and St. Louis:
      Edward H. Harriman ---------------  $321 00
      William Berri --------------------   552 45
      Edward Lyman Bill ----------------   828 10
      Louis Stern ----------------------   $97 80
      James H. Callanan ---------------- 1,591 38
      Frederick R. Green ---------------   768 55
      Frank S. McGraw ------------------   880 92
      Mrs. Norman E. Mack -------------- 1,592 45
      John K. Stewart ------------------ 1,013 39
      John C. Woodbury ----------------- 1,087 40
      John Young ----------------------- 1,928 75
      Cyrus E. Jones -------------------    35 50
                                        ---------  $10,697 69
Railroad, hotel and other expenses of the
  Commission attending the dedication ceremonies
  at St. Louis, April 30, 1903 ------------------    1,722 80
Railroad, hotel and other expenses of the
  Commission for meeting held at St. Louis
  in December, 1903 -----------------------------    1,260 50
Miscellaneous expenditures not included in
  above -----------------------------------------    1,565 33
                                                  -----------
Total expenditures ------------------------------  $53,864 64
                                                  ===========
Receipts:
    Rebate from Planters' Hotel -----------------      $60 00
    Rebate on insurance -------------------------      369 81
    Interest on deposits of funds
      in treasurer's hands ----------------------      403 66
                                                  -----------
Total receipts ----------------------------------     $833 47
                                                  ===========


NEW YORK STATE BUILDING, CONSTRUCTION

Caldwell & Drake, contract for construction
  of building and extras ------------------------  $61,634 85
Embellishment of building, models for
  Quadrigae, statuary, coat of arms, etc.,
  and mural decorations -------------------------   11,133 64
Enlarging and placing sculpture -----------------    5,000 00
Organ case --------------------------------------   $3,500 00
Furniture, carpets, shades, screens, etc. -------   19,750 55
Electroliers, electric fixtures, etc. -----------    5,077 73
Appointments, watchman's time clock, fire
  protection, refrigerators, gas logs, electric
  heaters, etc. ---------------------------------    1,189 90
Landscape gardening -----------------------------    3,694 30
Architects' fees --------------------------------    5,128 70
Architects' expenses ----------------------------    1,783 90
Insurance on building ---------------------------    2,444 20
                                                 ------------
Total expenditures ------------------------------ $120,337 77
                                                 ============
Receipts:
  Sale of building and furniture ----------------   $7,025 00
                                                 ============


NEW YORK STATE BUILDING, MAINTENANCE

Superintendent--salary --------------------------   $1,225 00
Hostesses and matrons--salaries -----------------    3,232 50
Attendants, postmaster, watchman, porters
  --salaries ------------------------------------   20,696 59
Janitor service ---------------------------------    2,682 50
Allowance for maintenance of superintendent,
   hostesses, matrons, etc., at St. Louis -------    1,902 10
Equipment, including table and bed linen,
  dishes, light renewals, canopies, electric
  fans, etc. ------------------------------------    4,486 91
General supplies, renewals, livery, cartage,
  baggage transfer and laundry ------------------    7,721 29
Light and water ---------------------------------    4,974 90
Caterers' bills, floral decorations, music,
  illuminations and other incidentals for all
  functions given by the Commission, including
  New York Week, Dedication Day and
  other occasions elsewhere enumerated,
  also for restaurant charges of all members
  of the Commission while at the Exposition -----  $17,444 79
Expenses of the Governor, his staff and
  legislative party, including transportation
  and hotel bills in connection with New
  York Week observance --------------------------    3,982 62
Special illumination of building in honor of
  visit of President Roosevelt ------------------      250 00
Total expenditures ------------------------------  $68,599 20
                                                  -----------
Receipts
  Rebate on gas, livery and safe ----------------      $70 00
                                                  ===========


EDUCATION

Director of Education and Social Economy
  --salary (20 1/2 months.) ---------------------   $3,422 20
Traveling expenses of Director, Advisory
  Committee and employees -----------------------    1,815 93
Clerks, stenographer, attendants, draughtsman
  and other employees--salaries -----------------    4,403 98
Allowance for maintenance of Director and
  attendants at St. Louis -----------------------    2,719 74
Printing and stationery and binding of
  exhibit work ----------------------------------      807 01
Supplies--material for preparation of
  exhibit ---------------------------------------    1,690 00
Installation-booth, facades, cabinets,
  counters, cases and appointments --------------    7,096 52
Express, freight, cartage, postage, telephone
  and telegraph ---------------------------------      793 73
                                                  -----------
Total expenditures-------------------------------  $22,749 11
                                                  ===========
Receipts:
Amounts received from cities, etc., on
  account of binding exhibit material,
  sale of installation and appointments               $666 50
                                                   ==========


FINE ARTS

Employees--salaries -----------------------------     $280 00
Storage of art works, packing, handling,
  repairing, etc. -------------------------------    3,129 09
Express, cartage, etc., to and from St. Louis        3,139 04
Insurance on art works --------------------------    2,423 00
Printing and supplies ---------------------------      173 26
Postage, telephone and telegraph and
  miscellaneous expenditures --------------------      155 56
                                                  -----------
Total expenditures ------------------------------   $9,299 95
                                                  ===========
Receipts:
  Rebate on insurance ---------------------------      $42 13
                                                  ===========


AGRICULTURE AND LIVE STOCK

Superintendent--salary (19 months)      ---------   $3,166 55
Superintendent--traveling expenses --------------    1,115 87
Allowance for maintenance of Superintendent
  and assistants at St. Louis -------------------    1,380 00
Assistants, attendants, laborers, etc.--
  salaries --------------------------------------    5,579 54
Miscellaneous traveling expenses for
  collecting exhibit material -------------------    1,120 93
Cost of grain, vegetables and dairy products
  for exhibit -----------------------------------    2,425 92
Installation--booth, counters, cabinets,
  show cases, etc. ------------------------------    4,110 44
Refrigerator show cases for butter and
  cheese ----------------------------------------    1,500 00
Printing and stationery -------------------------       42 45
Express, freight, cartage, including on live
  stock for exhibit, cold storage, telephone,
  telegraph and postage -------------------------   $2,230 62
Miscellaneous supplies --------------------------      612 13
Total expenditures ------------------------------  $23,285 45
Receipts:
  Sale of exhibit material ----------------------     $592 10


HORTICULTURE

Superintendent--salary (18 1/2 months) ----------   $3,111 06
Superintendent--traveling expenses --------------    1,021 81
Assistants, attendants, stenographer, labor,
  etc. ------------------------------------------    4,631 31
Allowance for maintenance of Superintendent
  and assistants at St. Louis -------------------    1,840 00
Miscellaneous traveling expenses, collecting
  fruit -----------------------------------------      858 90
Cost of fruit for exhibit, cold storage, etc.        2,579 81
Installation--booth, facade, tables, cases,
  etc. ------------------------------------------    3,711 26
Office rent, supplies, etc. ---------------------      736 72
Printing and stationery -------------------------      181 19
Freight, cartage, express, telephone,
  telegraph and postage -------------------------    1,580 62
Total expenditures ------------------------------  $20,252 68
Receipts:
  Rent of plates and sale of installation -------     $253 50


FOREST, FISH AND GAME

General traveling expenses, collecting
  exhibit material ------------------------------   $1,890 22
Cost of exhibit material ------------------------    5,782 49
Allowance for maintenance of special agent
  and assistants at St. Louis during
  Exposition period, and for packing and
  returning exhibit -----------------------------   $3,183 73
Installation--flooring, cabinets, show cases,
  frames, etc. ----------------------------------    3,283 42
Printing and stationery -------------------------      262 81
Freight, cartage, express and storage -----------      361 07
Miscellaneous supplies --------------------------       97 40
    Total expenditures --------------------------  $14,861 14
Receipts:
    Sale of floors ------------------------------      $15 00


MINES AND METALLURGY

Clerk hire and labor ----------------------------     $901 08
Traveling expenses, collecting exhibit and
  maintenance of attendants and assistants
  at St. Louis ----------------------------------    2,631 59
Excavating fossil trails ------------------------      180 91
Installation--flooring, cases, cabinets,
  counters, etc. --------------------------------    2,155 22
Freight, cartage, express, etc. -----------------    1,187 94
Postage, telephone and telegraph ----------------       91 22
Printing and stationery -------------------------      122 78
Supplies ----------------------------------------      207 44
Other miscellaneous expenditures ----------------      254 18
    Total expenditures --------------------------   $7,732 36


SOCIAL ECONOMY

Charities:
  Services of assistants preparing
    statistics, etc. ----------------------------     $148 25
  Supplies, photographs, etc.--------------------      549 56
  Freight, express and cartage ------------------      $52 25
  Printing and stationery -----------------------       16 58
    Total ---------------------------------------     $766 64
Model of Craig Colony ---------------------------     $500 08
Excise:
  Preparation and installation of charts --------     $276 32
Labor:
  Preparation of graphic charts -----------------     $505 15
  Printing, engraving, binding, etc. ------------      201 45
  Traveling expenses ----------------------------       44 50
    Total ---------------------------------------     $751 10

Lunacy:
  Services of assistants ------------------------      $86 00
  Photographs, supplies, etc. -------------------    1,291 58
  Traveling expenses ----------------------------       23 71
  Freight and cartage ---------------------------       40 28
    Total ---------------------------------------    $1441 57

Prisons:
  Traveling expenses and maintenance of
      attendants at St. Louis -------------------   $2,000 00


SUMMARY

Receipts:
  Appropriation, chapter 421, Laws of
    1902 ---------------------------------------- $100,000 00
  Appropriation, chapter 546, Laws of
    1903 ----------------------------------------  200,000 00
  Appropriation, chapter 640, Laws of
    1904 ----------------------------------------   40,000 00
  From General Administration, as per
    above schedule ------------------------------      833 47
  From State Building, construction -------------    7,025 00
  From State Building, maintenance --------------      $70 00
  From Education --------------------------------      666 50
  From Fine Arts --------------------------------       42 13
  From Agriculture and Live Stock ---------------      592 10
  From Horticulture -----------------------------      253 50
  From Forest, Fish and Game --------------------       15 00

    Total --------------------------------------- $349,497 70

Expenditures:
  General Administration ------------------------  $53,864 64
  State Building, construction ------------------  120,337 77
  State Building, maintenance -------------------   68,599 20
  Education -------------------------------------   22,749 11
  Fine Arts -------------------------------------    9,299 95
  Agriculture and Live Stock --------------------   23,285 45
  Horticulture ----------------------------------   20,252 68
  Forest, Fish and Game -------------------------   14,861 14
  Mines and Metallurgy --------------------------    7,732 36
  Social economy
    Charities --------------------------  $766 64
    Craig Colony -----------------------   500 08
    Excise -----------------------------   276 32
    Labor ------------------------------   751 10
    Lunacy ----------------------------- 1,441 57
    Prisons ---------------------------- 2,000 00
                                                     5,735 71
      Balance returned to State treasury --------    2,779 69
      Total ------------------------------------- $349,497 70




